GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY
HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

SCHOOL OF INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

MASTER OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS PROGRAM 









MASTER THESIS

Topic: Features of Growth Strategies of Semiconductor Companies on Foreign Markets of The Asia-Pacific Region: The Cases of Infineon and NXP Semiconductors





                                                                                          Student 
              Ivan Aksenov

                                                                                         Research Advisor 
Alexandra Zhukova
PhD, Associate professor






Moscow 2024
Introduction
Since its emergence semiconductor industry has been showing a notable global expansion and has already surpassed the USD half-trillion in size. Founded back in the 1960s the first startups have become the multibillion international businesses, which lead the technological transformation of the lower-stream markets nowadays. Over the recent decades, the Asia-Pacific has played one of the key roles in delivering the sustainable growth of the semiconductor companies, which already resulted in significant sales redistribution from the U.S. and Europe to the regional markets, especially China. Nevertheless, the latest uncertainties related to the slowdown of the Chinese economy, geopolitical tensions and the aftermaths of the COVID-19 pandemics question the prospective of stable regional development in future. Hence, it is becoming increasingly important to understand, how did international semiconductor manufacturers adjust their growth strategies to deliver consistent regional sales increase. This piece of research is to analyze the features of growth strategies undertaken by semiconductor firms on the foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific. Due to the limitations in data this research will primarily include the following countries: the PRC, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Malaysia, and Singapore. 
Growth strategies of companies on foreign markets are the object of this paper. Subject is defined as growth strategies of semiconductor companies on foreign markets. The research question is: “What are the features of growth strategies of semiconductor companies on the foreign market of the Asia-Pacific?”. Hence, our goal is to locate the features of growth strategies of such companies in Asia-Pacific and create the recommendations for managers in these industries.  
In the case study our research reviews Infineon and NXP Semiconductors, which are the global leaders in design and production of semiconductors for automotive, industrial power control, security payment and IoT applications. These companies were chosen due to the following reasons: 1) Despite operating on close end markets and having likewise shares of APAC countries in portfolio, their paces of growth have been different. This might shed a light on the reasons, why Infineon has managed to take the regional leadership over NXP especially in the car segment. 2) These companies have invested heavily in their Asia-Pacific strategy development and implementation, which resulted in achieving a more stable growth than the one of other large integral device manufacturers. 3) Infineon and NXP Semiconductors have also experienced a major part of trends faced by the other IDMs, which might make their cases representative for likewise companies. 
The timeline of this research is 2013-2023, but to better disclose the cases we might extend some of the data till 1999 with the special highlights for 2013-2023 period. 
While preparing the thesis we are to deal with the following tasks:
Study the current approaches to corporate growth strategies on foreign markets in general and for semiconductor industry specifically;
Explore the features of growth strategies undertaken by semiconductor manufacturers on foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific and already found by the other scholars;
To analyze the dynamics and recent trends in semiconductor industry with focus of APAC;
Examine the growth strategies of the leading IDM companies globally and in the Asia-Pacific; 
Perform the regional case study of Infineon and NXP Semiconductors and allocate the features of growth strategies demonstrated by the companies;
Compare the features found to what was demonstrated by other companies and the literature;
Provide recommendations for management of semiconductor companies based on the results of the analysis;
List key limitations of the study and recommendations for other researchers. 
In accordance with the abovementioned tasks the paper would follow the 3-chapter structure with each chapter divided into 3 subchapters. Chapter 1 is focused on theoretical aspects of growth strategies of semiconductor companies on foreign markets. It covers the existing research on corporate growth strategies in general and for semiconductor companies in 1.1. and 1.2. accordingly, while revealing the features of semiconductor companies’ growth strategies in the Asia-Pacific in 1.3. Chapter 2 is devoted to the analytical part. It includes the analysis of semiconductor market presented in 2.1. with the special focus on the Asia-Pacific and the practices of IDM companies there. Subchapters 2.2. and 2.3. include the case study of Infineon and NXP semiconductors. In Chapter 3 we show key research findings, recommendations for managers as well as highlight limitations of the paper and recommendations for further researchers.
In the work we apply the mixed method approach, which includes vertical and horizontal financial analysis, and statistical analysis as quantitative methods. Qualitative methods consist of case study, comparison, synthesis, literature analysis. 
The issue of growth strategies of companies on foreign markets was disclosed by Penrose (1959), Ansoff (1978), Durmaz and Ilhan (2016), Bahadir, Bharadwaj and Parzen (2009), Lau and Michie (2022). The scope of authors on growth strategies of semiconductor companies on foreign markets includes Aspelund, Azari, Aglen and Graff (2017), Lee (2011), Yasuda (2005), Poitiers and Weil (2021), Ryu, Kwak and Lee (2023), while Wu, Yu and Zhong (2022), Rasiah, Kong, Lin, and Song (2008) and Jie (2016) attempted to answer the research question. 
The abovementioned research design would help to narrow down the existing research gap, which is the lack of studies on features of semiconductor companies’ growth strategies in the Asia-Pacific region, especially of the European-based IDMs. 

Chapter 1. Theoretical aspects of features of growth strategies of semiconductor companies on the foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific
Theoretical aspects of growth strategies of companies on foreign markets
Over the decades growth strategies of the firm have been in focus of the scientific community. This interest was especially sparkled by the advancements in globalization enabling more companies to grow internationally, hence bringing numerous points of view on how to determine and classify “business growth”. 
According to ‘The Theory of the Growth of the Firm’ by Penrose (1959), the growth of the company is a natural process driven by managerial knowledge and experience, which create the foundation for further physical expansion. She also stated that size of the firm is a byproduct of the growth, which indeed has no limits and at some point in time will lead to the internationalization of the business (Lau & Michie, 2022). 
Despite there is no universal definition of what could be understood under the term “business growth”, the one could trace a division between quantitative and qualitative explanations. The first way implies the physical expansion of the firm in terms of revenue, number of goods sold, staff etc., while the second one focuses mostly on intangible assets e.g. managerial experience and quality of goods. 
The most widely accepted classification suggests that business growth strategies could be grouped into organic and inorganic. By using the term ‘organic growth’ scholars mean the business expansion driven by the development of company’s internal capabilities without external interaction (Durmaz & Ilhan, 2016). 
There are several points of view on what the major determinant of such a growth type is, but in general scholars look either at the firms-specific or external environment factors, which force the company to utilize its resources for the expansion purposes. The more detailed classification is provided in Table 1. 
Table 1. 
Theories of organic growth.
Source: compiled by the authors based on Bahadir et al. (2009).

One of the most widespread organic growth classifications was developed by Ansoff (1978), who suggested a so-called ‘product-market strategy’. This is based on the perception that corporations have 4 growth alternatives with diversification being the last, but most promising choice in the long-term, as it implies the changes in both market and the product offered. 
Table 2
The Ansoff model framework.
Source: compiled by the authors based on Ansoff (1978).

Durmaz and Ilhan (2016) also widened the classification and noted that organic growth strategies might be divided into 3 groups:
Intensive. This type was previously described by Ansoff matrix and best suites the companies, which failed to use the opportunity of their existing product portfolio or for those with relatively small market share;
Diversification. If this type of strategies is applied, company utilizes new technology to create new products for new markets. It might be subclassified into concentric diversification, which implies the focus one specific industry, and conglomerate diversification, which involves operations on multiple markets;
Modernization. This growth strategy is based on the investment in new manufacturing equipment and technology to increase the output and decrease the CoGS. 
Overall, organic growth strategies are noticed to have numerous benefits and drawbacks for the business. It is commonly believed that they might come less costly and provide more predictable growth. However, there is a risk of reaching a certain ceiling and growing at lower rates than the market. 
Inorganic growth, on the contrary, is ensured by using the resources coming from other firms and usually takes the form of mergers and acquisitions. 
Acquisitions happen when the company purchases the third-party business. They could take the form of either assets or shares purchase, which indeed provides the acquirer the control of the firm, while keeping the legal entities separate from each other. By the nature of the deal scholars also differentiate between friendly and hostile ones. In M&As different types of acquisitions make up most transactions (Junni & Teerikangas, 2019).
Unlike acquisitions, merger is a process in which several companies create a new single entity (Khan, 2011). In the academic literature one could find several types of mergers:
Vertical. It typically happens between companies operating of the different stages of the supply chain and aim to improve the control of it; 
Horizontal mergers occur between companies operating in the same industry with the purpose to create growth synergies from better economy of scale, increased market share etc.; 
Conglomerates are usually formed, when company uses the corresponding diversification strategy and happen between businesses in different fields of production (Gerald & Elisifa, 2013). 
There are also some specific means of achieving inorganic growth, such as joint ventures and strategic alliances. The key difference between this two is that the separate legal entity is created in JV, while in alliances firm just act together and perform the mutually beneficial exchange.  
Nevertheless, in the reality businesses use both organic and inorganic growth strategies, as they could provide different advantages and risks. Organic growth usually provides the slower speed of expansion, but also requires less investment in the specific period of time and contains less risk. On the other hand, inorganic growth strategy could speed up the firm’s growth in the exchange for the increased risk. Besides, it might require higher investment, which could affect the financial indicators more notably compared to the organic strategy. This is the reason, why most of the companies use a mixed approach and prioritize different means of growth in time.

Existing research on growth strategies of semiconductor companies on foreign markets
In literature one could find numerous studies related to growth strategies of semiconductor companies both globally and on the specific foreign markets. 
From organic side, product development is considered the most widespread among the semiconductor manufacturers. For instance, a study of Nordic VLSI found that it emerged as spinoff of the semiconductor laboratory. Due to the internal expertise, it was able to develop high-quality integrated circuits competitive on the international markets, which became the driver of its growth (Aspelund et al., 2017). Such a choice is dictated by the ‘Moore’s law’, which expects the productivity of microchips to double every 2 years, and the emergence of new chip-intensive segments with the need for tailored solutions.
Lee (2011) also notices that achievement of higher than industry-average paces of organic growth is possible only via investment in product development. However, there might be other components including entrepreneurial skills of management, creation of international R&D centers network and their co-location with foundries as well as competitions between different engineering teams.
Nevertheless, due to the high levels of globalization and competition as well as complexity of the industry, it is almost impossible for the firm to grow organically with the required pace. Hence, the application of inorganic strategies has become a norm for microelectronics producers. 
To start with, Yasuda (2005) notices a significant role of strategic alliances in speeding up the development with technology licensing and joint R&D agreements being equally popular forms of partnership. The primary motivation for this type of strategies was getting access to the partner’s resources, especially intellectual property. However, despite a positive effect of strategic alliances on the market share, chipmakers tend to have a U-shaped pattern of interacting with industry counterparts. It means that the firms with medium market share tend to be the most active in the creation of strategic alliances (Chuang et al., 2015). This is also supported by Lee (2011), who demonstrates that the use of JVs and alliances was beneficial for Samsung, when it was establishing the foundry business, while the larger players often refused to cooperate seeking to secure their expertise. 
Besides, there is evidence that microelectronic producers use strategic alliances to grant competitive access to the new markets and segments, which could be motivated by 2 major factors. First, collaborating with industry leaders might guide the firm’s R&D in provision of more suitable solutions for the perceived applications and thereby scale up the business more effectively. Second, microelectronic companies depend heavily on the economics of scale, so they want to ensure that they have the decent volumes sent to partners in future (Aspelund et al., 2017).
Finally, strategic alliances are created to develop and get early access to the most efficient equipment, which in turn would enable the production of even more efficient chips and increase the performance of the firm. For instance, TSMC, the largest global producer of semiconductors, set a strategic alliance with ASML, the only company capable of producing 14-nm wafer lithography equipment. By doing so, it has secured its leadership in the most innovative semiconductors manufacturing (Poitiers & Weil, 2021; Miller, 2022). 
There are certain trends and specifics on M&As in this field as well. Shao, Asatani and Sakata (2019) noticed that since its foundation semiconductor market has gone through the waves of vertical integrations aimed at increasing the efficiency and getting access to R&D resources, which were followed by the creation of ‘modular’ firms in the response of more diversified market needs. In the midterm scientists predict that there would be a new wave of vertical M&As in close future. 
Motivations for mergers and acquisitions between chipmaking companies as part of their growth strategies could also be split in several categories:
Getting access to the new technology. For instance, Intel has long applied the strategy of purchasing small businesses to apply their R&D results to their products;
Entering the new segments of semiconductor application. Each industry uses the specific types of chips for their purpose. Purchasing corporations well-established on the specific field could be a more viable solution for developing there (Custodio, 2012);
Speeding up the growth via creating synergies. McKinsey (2016) illustrates that semiconductor companies which were the most active I the field of M&A showed the highest growth rates and shareholder returns due to the synergetic effects created. 
However, the same study by McKinsey (2016) demonstrated that chipmakers committed M&As less frequently than firms in other technological industries. This is explained by high costs of such companies and high potential risks associated with acquisitions. Hence, VCs and strategic alliances remain the most common way to grow inorganically, but the trend for industry consolidation via mergers and acquisitions is becoming clearer. 
From the regional perspective, there is limited research approaching the issue. However, based on numerous papers we might get a general understanding of strategies used in the Asia-Pacific. Chang and Hsu (1998) showed that Texas Instruments was creating joint ventures with local companies, while Miller (2022) indicated that they began expanding on the market from OSAT (assembly) facilities and only later moved on to wafer plants. Besides, his research highlighted that Japanese and Korean companies used the intensive product development and modernization strategies to compete with American companies.
According to Grimes and Du (2022), South Korean memory chipmakers preferred organic growth strategies in China by investing in the construction of local assembly sites to guarantee the better lead time. However, the product development was primarily carried out in the home country. At the same time in other countries of the region South Korean companies continued the policy of creating formal and informal strategic alliances (Byun & Ahn, 1989; Ryu et al., 2023). 
Taiwanese companies also use the product development strategy, but in their case, this is a manufacturing technique, which is a result of the specialization on the foundry model (Wu et al., 2006). Over the recent years, greenfield investment in neighboring countries became the part of growth strategy as well. Taiwanese manufacturers created a chain of smaller contract manufacturing sites in the APAC countries including China, Singapore, and Malaysia to offer the best time-to-market options and catch the demand from both local and international producers (Rasiah et al., 2008). From inorganic point of view, local companies are actively engaging in joint ventures and strategic alliances to perform technological exchanges and secure future contracts. 
The studies on Chinese semiconductor companies reveal that those are also using the same growth patterns with active involvement of M&As and technology purchase to catch-up with industry leaders (Huang, 2022). 
To sum up, the growth of semiconductor companies on both internal and foreign markets is based on mixed strategies. From the organic point of view, this is an intensive product development supported by the qualitative advancements in managerial expertise, R&D network, and economies of scale. Inorganic strategies primarily include joint ventures, strategic alliances, and partnerships, while M&As are performed less frequently than in other industries. The current pieces of research also show that the abovementioned strategies might also be used in the Asia-Pacific region. 


Previous research on key dimensions of growth strategies of semiconductor companies on foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific
Despite the lack of research dedicated solely to the features of growth strategies, there are still some of them mentioned in the paper on related topics. Overall, studies covering the issue might be classified into intraregional and interregional. 
The first category includes the features of Asian companies’ growth on the other markets of the region. According to Lee (2011), for South Korean companies this might include the specialization on the memory chip market, the concentration of wafer production in home country with only OSAT facilities built in China, and the large share of internal markets in chyobols. 
In China Huang (2022) highlights that local manufacturers need to ensure the higher paces of growth to catch up with the international competitors. This results in higher activity on the field of M&As compared to companies from other countries. Besides, Chinese semiconductor producers are investing in the creation of positive reputation among the clients to access the lower-stream markets. Finally, local companies use government support as one of the growth means, as the PRC is increasingly interested in creating the advanced national capabilities as the response to the U.S. restrictions (Wu et al., 2022). 
Taiwanese companies’ main feature is the regional expansion of their foundry model in the APAC both independently and in partnership with Asian and foreign stakeholders. By doing so, TSMC and UMC are attempting to satisfy the growing demands in China and ASEAN by providing the best time-to-market, which is becoming increasingly important for the clients (Rasiah et al., 2008) 
Companies from the non-APAC regions are believed to follow a gradual growth pattern on this market. Rasiah et al. (2008) showed that American and European firms on the initial stages of market development invested in regional assembly facilities in Malaysia, Singapore, and later China. This was done with the purpose to take advantage of the cheap regional labor and improve the efficiency of supply chain. For instance, Motorolla, Infineon and Intel began like this. It was also important that local governments provided support for such projects. Besides, U.S. and European companies were active in creating strategic partnerships with local manufacturers to develop the suitable solutions and secure the further market share. APAC manufacturers were eager to embark upon such cooperation due to the internal expertise of global semiconductor companies, which could be used to improve the characteristics of the goods.  Furthermore, some of the companies are known to take advantage of product marketing: Intel actively promoted the use of its ICs in the PC and carried out an advertising campaigns on the Chinese market (Jie, 2016). 
Table 3
Growth strategies of semiconductor companies on foreign markets and their features on the foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific region
Source: compiled by the authors based on Lee (2011), Huang (2022), Wu et al. (2022), Rasiah et al. (2008), Jie (2016).

To sum up, the existing research provides us with limited information on features of semiconductor companies’ growth strategies on foreign markets. In general, those tend to follow the same strategies as globally with slightly different accents. For instance, Chinese manufacturers use more inorganic means of growth, while the Taiwanese promote the fabless operational model. Western companies might also use steeper organic growth models compared to Asian companies and engage in partnerships to utilize their advanced expertise. 
Nevertheless, there is still a research gap presented. First, there is a lack of comprehensive study regarding the growth features of foreign semiconductor companies on the APAC market. Second, no paper was found comparing the growth strategies of Western chip companies locally and finding, which features could result in the faster expansion versus competitors.


Chapter 2. Overview of global semiconductor industry and case study of Infineon and NXP Semiconductors on the foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific
2.1. Overview of global semiconductor industry
Since its emergence in the 1960s semiconductor industry has reached the size of $526.8 billion in 2023. This field of economy includes the following 3 activities:
R&D and product design. This step includes defining the technical requirements, characteristics and layouts of the semiconductor to enable it to perform the required functions (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2023). Firms doing this type of operations exclusively are known as ‘fabless’;
Fabrication consisting of several consecutive manipulations resulting in the production of wafer with the special pattern and either positive or negative charge. Firm operating at this stage of the supply chain are usually referred to as foundries. 
Assembly, testing and packaging (ATP). At this stage wafers are placed on the board to create a chip, which is the final product of the semiconductor industry. This step of the supply chain involves testing each wafer and chip to decrease the defect rates. Businesses, which provide their services for ATP are also known as OSAT (outsourced semiconductor assembly and testing) (McKinsey, 2020; Singh et al., 2023). 
Apart from the above-mentioned types of firms operating on the semiconductor market, there are so-called integrated device manufacturers (IDM), which conduct their operations on the whole supply chain. This specific type of semiconductor companies would be the primary focus of this research. 
Picture 1.

Composition of Semiconductor Industry. Compiled by the authors based on Khan et al. (2021)

Global market overview. Over the recent decade semiconductor industry has grown by 72,2% from $306 billon in 2013 to $526,8 billion in 2023 and is projected to reach 1 trillion in size by 2030 (McKinsey, 2020). However, the industry development has been inconsistent with periods of high growth followed by stagnation and fall in 2015-2016, 2019 and 2023. Such dynamics is explained by numerous industry-specific and macro factors. First, ICs have a relatively short cycle of approximately 2-years long, which is linked to the Moore’s law. This results in a ‘bullwhip effect’, which is caused by the lack of capabilities to produce new chip models in the beginning of the cycle leading to deficits. Later on, manufacturers put into operation new facilities, which causes the prices to drop sharply (Ahlsten, 2023). The ‘bullwhip effect’ could be seen in years 2017 and 2021, which can also be illustrated by analyzing the statistics of the industry output: as the available data since 2016 shows, there has been no year with negative production growth (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2024). 
Graph 1.

Global semiconductor industry revenue (USD billion) and YoY change (%) in 2013-2023.
Source: compiled by the authors based on Semiconductor Industry Association reports.

Second, sharp growth in semiconductor market revenues happened in 2017 due to the shortage of NAND (flash memory) chips used in SSDs (Solid-State Drivers) and an increased inflation in that market segment (Pettey & Meulen, 2018), while in 2021 the world experienced the global semiconductor shortage caused by the combination of COVID-19 pandemic raising demand for PCs, drought in Taiwan, US-China Trade war and extreme winter in Texas (King et al., 2021). 
Third, 2019 and 2023 illustrate the cyclical price downturns followed by the negative dynamics in key application segments. In the first case the oversupply happened due to the weak demand for DRAM and NAND from the hyperscalers. In 2023 the 8,2% contraction in sales could be related to the following factors: weak demand on key markets due to global instability and high interest rates, end of cycle, prices stabilization after the 2020-2022 crisis and geopolitical tensions in key regions of semiconductor consumption (Li, 2023). 
Nevertheless, despite the recent industry turbulence and slowdown analysts hold a positive outlook for short- and midterm. Simons (2024) expects that industry sales would be 13% higher in 2024 than in 2023 and could break the record of 2022 by at least 2,5%. IDC (2023) forecasts even better figures of 20% industry expansion. 
According to Simons (2024), global chipmaking industry would be driven by numerous internal and external factors. First, semiconductors are entering the new upswing phase of the industry cycle. Second, automotive, generative AI and military applications segments would create the additional demand for chips, especially microprocessors and memory (KPMG, 2023). Third, supported by local legislation American and European players are planning the expansion of wafer-fabrication facilities on home markets, which would create the additional supply and secure the supply chain (Simons, 2024). 
In the longer term, most analytical agencies also agree that semiconductors would become a $1 trillion industry by 2030 (McKinsey, 2022), which means the surge by 47% and CAGR of 7,4%.
Graph 2.

Projected semiconductor industry revenue (USD billion) and YoY growth (%) in 2024-2030. 
Source: compiled by the authors based on McKinsey (2020), IDC (2023).

This would be spurred by the increase in consumption in three end markets: automotive, data storage and wireless communications. The highest CAGR of 13% would be at the automotive electronics application due to the increase in production of the electric and autonomous vehicles as well the more electronics is being used in vehicles in general. Recent trends related to generative AI and 5G networks development would also drive the sales at the data storage and communications segments at rates of 5% and 6% respectively (McKinsey, 2022; KPMG, 2024). 
Picture 2.

Growth of semiconductor industry by end market, 2021-2030.
Source: McKinsey (2020).

Besides, the industry could benefit from the advancements in manufacturing technologies and ESG practices. The production of ICs requires a significant amount of energy and water, hence greener solutions could make the production more sustainable in the longer terms. 
At the same time, semiconductor industry experiences certain limitations and risks for further growth. First, the overconcentration of semiconductor production in the Asia-Pacific region adds to the supply chain vulnerability. In 2022, 82% of basic 300 mm wafer manufacturing capacity was in only 4 countries: South Korea, China, Taiwan and Japan (Zandt, 2023), while in advanced chips manufacturing 68% of the market is made up by Taiwan solely (Lu, 2024). As a result, due to the drought on the island in 2021 industry experienced product delivery delays and prices skyrocketing, which is one of the series of examples that show the risks of overconcentration (Financial Times, 2023).
Second, industry executives indicate the issue of skilled STEM labor shortage as the sharpest issue within the next 3 years with the potential of 67 000 jobs unfilled by 2030 (Simons, 2024). 
Third, the growth could be restrained by the territorialization / nationalization of intellectual property due to government interventions (Simons, 2024). It results from the geopolitical tension between the U.S. and China as well as the overconcentration of the production in Taiwan, where the contradicting interests of both parties overlap. American market makes us almost a quarter of global chip demand, but is capable of manufacturing only 12% due to the reshoring and the adoption of fabless business models. Currently Taiwan and the PRC are responsible for around 15% and 13% of the U.S. imports respectively, while also having access to the American technology via licensing agreements (Leibovici & Dunn, 2022). This raises concerns among policymakers in Washington that the latest technology could be used by Beijing in its own advantage or lost during the potential conflict in the Formosa straight. To prevent this the U.S. imposed sanctions on SMIC, Huawei and dozens of other Chinese technological companies restricting the commercial application of their chips and limiting their access to the latest technology (DW, 2023). At the same time both countries have adopted policies aimed at creating the national semiconductor manufacturing bases, which could result in a technological decoupling the long term and limit the growth prospects. 
Table 4. 
Semiconductor industry midterm growth drivers and limitations.
Source: compiled by the authors based on McKinsey (2020), McKinsey (2022), KPMG (2024), Simons (2024).

Market segmentation by chip types
Semiconductor market could be segmented in the number of ways. One of them is by the type of the product produced:
Logic chip are comprised of central processing units (CPU), graphic processing units (GPU) and microcontrollers. They are used to process information and have the largest end markets in personal computing and vehicles, while AI is becoming an additional demand driver. Logic is the top-selling category on the market with the total sales of $178,5 billion in 2023 (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2024) and is expected to grow with the annual 2024-2030 CAGR of 10,4% reaching the estimated value of $440 billion by 2030 correlating with the overall expansion of key end markets (AR/VR Chip Market Size, 2023). 
Graph 4. 

Logic semiconductor market size (USD billion) and YoY change (%) in 2018-2023. 
Source: compiled by the authors based on Semiconductor Industry Association reports and own calculations.

Memory chips come as the second largest type of semiconductors with $92,3 billion in sales in 2023 (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2024). This includes dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) for short-term data storage and NAND-flash for the longer-term functions. These chips are mostly used by consumer electronics producers and data centers, while automobiles are becoming an increasingly important end market. Over the latest 5 years memory market has gone through the wave-shaped development: in 2018 it was the largest segment in general with $158 billion in sales, while 2019 and 2022-2023 it significantly lost in value and became the second. It is expected that due to the increase in demand from the abovementioned industries DRAM would grow at a 11,7% CAGR in 2024-2030 and NAND to expand by 5,7% (NAND Flash Memory Market, 2023). 
Graph 5. 

Memory semiconductor market size (USD billion) and YoY change (%) in 2018-2023. 
Source: compiled by the authors based on Semiconductor Industry Association reports and own calculations.
Analog chips are used for converting analog signals into digital ones and come as the third most produced category with $81 billion in revenue in 2023 and expected CAGR of 7,5% by 2030 (Statista, 2024; Global Analog IC Market, 2023). This market stands out from the memory and logic, as a major part of the devices is customized for the specific needs of end users, which results in a smaller-batch manufacturing. Currently the largest buyers of this type of semiconductors operate in the industrial, communications, automotive and military segments (Singh et at., 2023). The competitive landscape there also looks differently from the other segments. It is divided between mostly American and European-based manufacturers, such as Texas Instruments, Infineon and NXP Semiconductors (Global Analog IC Market, 2023). 
Optoelectronics, sensors and discretes (O-S-D) are sometimes grouped into one category and are used for image visualization, external signals detection and electrical current control in a wide variety of end markets. The total O-S-D revenue in 2023 amounted $86,73 billion with optoelectronics, sensors and discretes sales of $42,58 billion, $8,2 billion and $35,95 billion respectively (Statista, 2024; Imarc Group, 2023). It is expected that this market segment is also projected to experience a growth higher that the industry average, with the best CAGR of 9,3% by 2030 in optoelectronics (Optoelectronics Market Poised for, 2023).
To sum up, semiconductor industry is seen to experience significant expansion in all the major product types. Nevertheless, there could be noticed numerous growth leaders in terms of relative and absolute number.: the optoelectronics, especially AR/VR chips, and DRAM memory semiconductors, which would enlarge by twofold figures. The largest value would still be added by the logic and DRAM memory segments, as they serve as the most basic chip types. 
Regional dimension. Asia-Pacific. Semiconductor industry is extensively globalized and involves the interaction of manufacturers in many countries. Nevertheless, over the decades of the market development there have formed numerous manufacturing clusters, which serve as the key points of supply chain. According to the available data, Taiwan, Japan, China and South Korea together account for 82% of ICs manufacturing capabilities with South Korea serving as the single largest manufacturer with 25% of all capabilities (Statista, 2024). It is also a country producing the most memory semiconductors in the world with 60,5% of the total market share (Invest Korea, 2022). 
Graph 6.

Distribution of global semiconductor fabricating capacities between countries in 2022, %.
Source: compiled by the authors based on Zandt (2023).

However, when analyzed from the ownership perspective, the U.S.-based corporations control almost half of global supply. South Korean companies come the second, as they dominate the memory semiconductor segment. Taiwan’s share, on the contrary is not as huge, as it concentrates on contract manufacturing on just several manufacturing sites on the island (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2024). 
Graph 7.

Semiconductor patents ownership by country in 2023, %
Source: compiled by the based on Semiconductor Industry Association (2024)

According to the current market trends, the share of the U.S. and China in global IC manufacturing could increase in the midterm, as both countries are pursuing the localization strategy aimed at securing the core semiconductor supply. For instance, the PRC named the industry development as the priority in the 14th 5-year plan and is launching a $40 billion state fund to finance the equipment for chip manufacturing (Reuters, 2023). In part this is a reaction to the U.S. policy, which sanctioned the supply of the advanced integrated circuits to the PRC and the Chips Act aimed at supporting the development of local competences and manufacturing sites. 
If looked deeper into IC types, manufacturing capabilities distribution might vary significantly between countries. According to Singh et al. (2023), Taiwan was a global leader in logic, the largest chip segment, mostly due to the TSMC and UMC foundries. At the same time in the memory segment South Korea was an absolute market leader, as Samsung Electronics and SK Hynix, were located there. Analog and sensor segments, which require more tailor-made solutions, are led by the U.S. and Europe with the significant role of other markets as well. 

Graph 8.

Wafer manufacturing by country and chip type, % of global output. 2021. 
Source: compiled by the authors based on Khan et al. (2021)

To sum up, in all segments but analog Asia-Pacific remains the distinct leader. This has happened because of the growth of South Korean and Japanese semiconductor producers over the recent decades and reshoring of the European and American capabilities for the increase of cost-efficiency. 
If looked at the upper part of the supply chain, e.g. equipment, professional software or intellectual property the United States and the EU remain by far the market leaders. For instance, the U.S. – based firms produce almost 70% the software used in semiconductor production, which still enables to country to have the significant impact on the international manufacturing processes despite accounting for the relatively small proportion in the manufacturing (McKinsey, 2024). 
Nevertheless, the Asia-Pacific remains the leader and the driving force of the global semiconductor market making up almost 66% in 2023 with the overall size of regional consumption assessed at $351 billion in 2022 (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2024). 
From the country prospective, Deloitte (2019) highlights that Japan is leading the upstream of the industry by sourcing raw materials of extreme purity, precise equipment and numerous categories of specialty semiconductors. Over the 20th century the country was one of the market leaders in mass semiconductor production but lost its competitive edge due to the 1986 US-Japan agreement and competition from South Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia (Loe, 2024). Nevertheless, the country might get the advantage of the current tensions between Beijing, Washington and Taipei by supporting FDI and its local IC manufacturing. For instance, TSMC opened its foundry in Kumamoto in February 2024, while Rapidus, the joint venture of Toyota Motor Corporation and Sony Group producing automotive chips, received $2,2, billion in subsidies (Chiang, 2024; Tochiyabashi & Kutty, 2023). As a result, analysts predict that the Japanese semiconductor market would grow with approximately 8% CAGR and reach $66,8 billion in sales by 2027 with the major local end markets in automotive and industrial segments (Statista, 2024).
Taiwan is driving the regional foundry business and produces more than 90% of the most advanced semiconductors worldwide (The Economist, 2023) and aserves as the regional hub for the FDI in foundry projects. For instance, TSMC opened manufacturing facilities in Nanjing and Shanghai to better serve the Chinese orders and UMC acquired Hejian Technology in Xiamen (TSMC, 2024; UMC, 2009). The most recent influence of the U.S.-China trade war and sanctions policy also forces the island’s manufacturers to choose Japan as the primary direction of their FDI. 
 However, despite both strong global and regional positions the island’s semiconductor industry development is facing the most risks in comparison to its neighboring competitors. This is explained by the geopolitical risks, probability of the natural disasters and the low localization of its supply chain. As a result, Taiwanese IC industry is projected to grow at approximately 5% CAGR by 2027, which is lower that the global rates (Statista, 2024). It is also noted that domestic consumption of ICs on Taiwan is inferior compared to the neighboring countries. 
South Korean semiconductor business is ranked second, after China. The country locates Samsung Electronics, SK Hynix, the global market leaders in memory segment accounting for 73% of DRAM and 51% of NAND flash market (International Trade Administration, 2023). 
Almost 50% of its $131,09 billion semiconductor export sales were routed to the PRC, while Vietnam stood the 2nd with 12,3% of total exports. Such a significant concentration of just 2 countries is explained by the application of memory chips in personal electronics, which are extensively produced in these states. From the import perspective, the supply tends to be more diverse with China making up 25,3% in 2023 and followed by Taiwan, Japan and the United States. As South Korea has less focus on analog devices, but still requires them for its extensive internal industries, it imports them from neighboring states or attracts European and U.S. based producers (Jeong, 2024).
The dominance of the Asia-Pacific region, especially the PRC, in the South Korean semiconductor trade also exposes the national industry to numerous risks, e.g. U.S.-China rivalry, Taiwan strait tensions and dependency on the Chinese economic growth. Hence, the country has announced its plans invest $430 billion over the following 23 years into the new semiconductor foundry cluster as part of the effort to decouple with the PRC market (DW, 2024). Overall, it is expected that the country’s market would grow at 8-12% CAGR by 2030, which is slightly higher than the global average. 
China is the largest regional market for semiconductors sized $179 billion in 2023 (China’s semiconductor industry, 2023). The country holds strong positions in older generation semiconductors manufacturing and is a global OSAT hub accounting for almost 40% of such operations (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2021). From the product type prospective, the PRC’s positions are strong in the field of discretes, low-end logic and analog ICs for consumer electronics, telecom and industrial applications (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2021). 
However, it has relatively weak capabilities in high-end products. As a latecomer to the industry, it is estimated to have almost 5 years technological lag from its leaders, which is critical for the industry where products become outdated every 2 years (Zhang, 2019). Hence, it is highly dependent on its global partners for the industry development and imports the significant share of its chips with the current figure of $349,5 billion (China Chip Imports Suffer Steepest Drop, 2024). 
In future it is expected that the imports would decline steadily due to the development of local semiconductor producers like SMIC and HiSilon as well due to the investment of foreign companies in the local production. This would also contribute to the national IC industry growth. According to Semiconductor Industry Association (2021), it would have a 14,7% revenue CAGR by 2030, which is almost twice as fast as the global average. 
 However, since the field of semiconductors is becoming increasingly politized, the PRC has experienced some trade restrictions in the advanced semiconductors and equipment supply. This forces the country to develop the internal industry-support programs, which already described in this research. 
Growth strategies of IDM companies. In terms of market share IDM remains the largest operational segment with 35% of the market followed by fabless and foundry companies with around 25% of the market. At the same time OSAT remains the least marginal segment, as despite serving the upper-flow designers and wafer producers it took only 7% of the market in 2023. 
Graph 9. 

Semiconductor industry revenue by operational model in 2023, USD billion.
Source: authors’ own calculations, Semiconductor Industry Association (2024). 

Over the latest decades fabless IC companies delivered the higher paces of growth in comparison to the traditional integrated device manufacturers. According to the available data, in 2011-2021 revenue CAGR of fabless firms was almost twice higher than IDM. In part, this is related to the better flexibility of such business model, as in enables to quicklier react to the demand fluctuation on the end markets and better regulate the stock, while also providing the lower entry barriers and ability to invest more in R&D (Qiao & Lu, 2022). 
Nevertheless, despite the significant expansion of fabless firms, IDMs remain the dominant market players. Moreover, memory and analog segment were not much impacted by this transition, which could be explained in numerous ways. 
To start with, the integrated approach provides more options for adjusting the production to the specific market needs, put new product in production faster than competitors and introduce systemic innovations (McKinsey, 2020; Qiao & Lu, 2022). This could also explain the dominance of such companies of the analog IC market, as end users might want the tailored solutions for their purposes. 
Besides, the tighter internal control of the supply chain could contribute to its higher stability, which can make IDMs the more viable choice of numerous semiconductor-intensive industries. 
Furthermore, the accumulated expertise of integral device manufacturers could make them more efficient in solving the complex market problems, while fabless firms could better target narrower issues (Kapoor & Adner, 2013). 
The leading positions in IDM are alternately taken by Intel and Samsung Electronics, which make up 26,5% ($48,7 billion) and 19,5% ($39,9 billion) respectively, while the 3rd position is held by SK Hynix with 11,1% of IDM market share ($22,75 billion). They are followed by Infineon, ST Microelectronics and Texas Instruments with almost equal market shares of around 8%. 
Over the latest 5 years the growth dynamics of IDM companies has been notably inconsistent, as the industry went through the shortage crisis and global COVID-19 restrictions. As a result, all manufacturers observed but Infineon, ST Microelectronics and NXP Semiconductors, experienced at least 2 years of sharp revenue declines followed by the exponential growth. To better understand the business growth dynamics, we calculated the 5-year revenue and EPS CAGR, which demonstrate that there were 3 types of companies:
Negative revenue and EPS CAGR: Intel, SK Hynix;
Positive revenue and EPS CAGR: Infineon, ST Microelectronics, Texas Instruments, NXP Semiconductors;
Negative revenue, but positive EPS CAGR: Micron Technology.
Samsung Electronics was deliberately excluded from the calculations, as the company also has its large internal market for semiconductors and its reporting does not allow to fully understand the clear revenue changes for semiconductor products. 
Table 5. 
2023 market share and 2018-2023 revenue and EPS CAGR of largest IDM companies, %. 
Source: compiled by the author based on own calculations, Intel financial statements, Samsung Electronics financial statements, SK Hynix financial statements, Infineon financial statements, ST Microelectronics financial statements, Texas Instruments financial statements, Micron Technology financial statements, NXP Semiconductors financial statements. 

For this research, we analyzed both global and regional strategies of the abovementioned companies. Currently product development is used as the primary organic growth strategy and is found among all the IDMs, while Intel is also introducing diversification practices by venturing on the foundry business (McGregor, 2021). In numerous cases modernization and expansion of manufacturing sites is also used to support growth. 
From inorganic perspective, IDM companies tend to be more active in strategic alliances and joint ventures, which are primarily used for R&D and collaborative manufacturing of new market solutions. However, SK Hynix and Micron also demonstrated the notable activity in M&As. Both companies are not the market leaders in their segment (memory and logic respectively) and constantly compete with larger players, namely Samsung Electronics and Intel. Hence, they are required to provide the higher paces of growth and attract more inorganic means to keep up. 
In APAC these companies also used the same kind of growth strategies with numerous features observed. The detailed information on all these companies is presented in table 6. 
Table 6. 
Global growth strategies of leading IDM companies and their features in the Asia-Pacific. 
Source: compiled by the authors based on Intel (2020), Intel (2023), Reuters (2023), Nikkei Asia (2020), Nikkei Asia (2023), McGregor (2021), South China Morning Post (2023),Texas Instruments (2024), Micron (2023).
 
To sum up, semiconductors is a rapidly growing ang highly competitive industry with short 2-year product life cycles. Despite facing numerous upswings and downturns recently, it is projected to almost double in size and reach 1 trillion USD by 2030 due to the increasing demand from automotive, data storage and wireless communications end markets supported by the advancements in ESG practices and development of the Chinese and U.S. national industries. However, there are still numerous threats for growth caused by STEM workers shortage, geopolitical tensions between Beijing and Washington as well as the supply chain vulnerability. 
In terms of product segments, the growth leaders would be DRAM semiconductors, optic chips for AR/VR and logic products, with the least also being the largest category produced. 
Currently the largest part of semiconductors is manufactured and marketed in the Asia-Pacific region with only exceptions in sensors and analog devices. Taiwan remains the global leader in foundry business for logic ICs, while South Korea is ranked second and is pioneering the production of memory products. Japanese companies once being the regional leaders have lost their competitive edge and switched primarily to the supply of extremely pure materials and equipment. However, analysts see the perspectives for the country’s industry in context of U.S.-China tensions and risks associated with Taiwan. China is viewed as the regional rising star in both consumption and production terms. Currently the country is the global leader in chip assembly and application for the end products, but still lags in the manufacturing of advanced semiconductors. The PRC authorities and companies are investing in the development of local capabilities to bridge the 5-year technological gap with market leaders. Hence, if foreign companies want to continue growing on the Chinese market, they should utilize their more profound expertise by customizing their products for local end users and ensure the faster technological growth compared to the Chinese competitors. 
All the above-mentioned factors impact the design of growth strategies of IDM companies, which are currently the largest producers of microdevices. The analysis of 5 market leaders demonstrated that their global strategy corresponds to the findings in literature. Product developments via investment in R&D and creation of the research network remains the primary means of organic growth. Inorganic development is also ensured by the network of strategic partnerships or joint ventures, while the M&A activity might vary between the company. The case of SK Hynix demonstrates that M&As might be more actively used in case the semiconductor company needs to catch up with the leader. 
Strategies in the Asia-Pacific in general tend to follow the global guidelines with numerous features observed. First, companies used the strategy of creation large regional manufacturing hubs in locations with optimal time-to-markets. The creation of such clusters began from OSAT facilities and later expanded to wafer plants. Second, American companies are noted to be more active in the creation of strategic R&D partnerships, while South Korean companies internalize this process at home. Third, the case of Micron demonstrated the need to actively utilize GR resources to ensure the business growth in China. Fourth, to better compete on the diverse APAC markets semiconductor companies in logic and memory segments are performing consolidation activities by acquiring local businesses and selling non-core assets. 


2.2. The case of Infineon on the foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific
Infineon Technologies AG is a German-based integral semiconductor device manufacturer, which specializes on the design and production of power control and embedded semiconductors, which are further used in automotive, industrial power and security systems. It was established in 1999 as the spin-off from Siemens and since then has become the countries’ largest IC manufacturer with 2023 sales reaching EUR 16,31 billion (Infineon, 2024). 
In terms of the product portfolio, Infineon core segment was power semiconductors generating 55% or EUR 8,97 billion. With this figure the company has been ranked as the world’s largest supplier in the segment having control of 20,6% of the market share in 2022. Besides, it has a prominent position in MCUs, from which it creates a third of its sales and is able to supply 12,6% of the global market. 
Graph 10.

2023 Infineon sales by product types, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on Infineon (2024)

From the end market prospective, the automotive segment was the core of Infineon sales making up 51% in 2023. If dived deeper, e-mobility, advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) and auto body power were the key end market segments accounted for 14%, 5% and 12% of sales respectively. 
Another important application of Infineon’s products was both green and traditional industrial power management semiconductors, which collectively created the 36% of the revenue in 2023. 
Graph 11.

2023 Infineon sales by end market, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on Infineon (2024)

There are also numerous more detailed applications, which are named as the company’s revenue drivers. Those are primarily linked to the major trends within the key end markers, namely the expansion of EVs, transition to greener energy sources and the increasing penetration of the artificial intelligence. As a result, the following application were listed as the major growth contributors: E-mobility (14%), renewables (7%), ADAS (5%), IoT (5%) and AI/data center (4%). 
Graph 12.

2023 Infineon TOP revenue driving segments by market share, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on Infineon (2024)

The development of the abovementioned segments has ensured the stable rise in Infineon’s revenue over the last decade, which contrasts significantly with other large IDM players. 
Graph 13.

2013-2023 Infineon annual revenue (EUR billion) and YoY change (%).
Source: compiled by the authors based on Infineon annual reports and authors’ calculations.

Other key financial metrics of the company had the more volatile dynamics over the recent 10 years with operating and net profit being the most unstable ones. However, Infineon never went below the bottom line over the observed period and managed to significantly improve all the indicators listed below. 
Table 7.
Infineon major financial indicators change in 2013-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and Infineon financial statements.

From the efficiency perspective, Infineon also optimized the quality of its growth due to the intensive cost-cutting efforts in 2012-2013, equipment and workforce optimization (Infineon, 2012). Another explanation is that the company has managed to find adjacent niches, where it can effectively market and sell its products with less costs, and benefitted from the economies of scale. The margin dynamics is shown in table 10.  
Table 8.
Infineon margins and their change in 2013-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and Infineon financial statements.

Regional analysis shows the vital role of Asia-Pacific creating 59% of sales value. This includes the 32% share of China and 10% share of Japan, which have been the 1st and 3rd largest countries for Infineon respectively. Over the last 10 years those have also been the fastest growing sales destination with China expanding by 642% and Japan scaling up by 649%,. The other countries of the Asia-Pacific have grown significantly slower, only by 205%, which also shows the growth focuses of Infineon. 
Graph 14.
 
Change of Infineon regional revenue redistribution 2013-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and Infineon financial statements.

Infineon made its first serious steps in the Asia-Pacific market in the 1970s, when it first opened a factory and later the IC design center in Singapore as part of Siemens A.G. Since then, it has expanded significantly and currently owns 9 regional manufacturing sites and 15 R&D centers as part of the strategy to deliver the most suitable solutions for end customers with optimal lead-time (Infineon, 2024). Over more than 4 decades of the APAC presence, the company has gone through numerous stages. 
Before spin-off Infineon developed Singapore potential as a regional production, R&D and sales hub. The strategic location of Singapore on the strait of Malacca enabled to optimize the logistics between the key regional markets. Besides, it had an abundance of STEM workers due to the semiconductor cluster created there by Intel, Texas Instruments, and other international players there. Finally, the city was providing the preferences for the manufacturers ready to perform the brownfield investments (Miller, 2022). 
Besides, as a part of Siemens Infineon was focused on partnering with telecommunication companies and the R&D facilities development. This enabled the company to sell products for EUR 899 million in APAC, which accounted for 21% of the corporate revenues (Infineon, 2001). 
After the spin-off Infineon began to reinvent its growth strategy globally and in the APAC. Its international growth in the 21st century was defined by the principles of 5-to-1 strategy applied in 2002 and amended later in 2006 and 2011. Its pillars looked as follows:
Become №1 manufacturer in core business segments;
Achieving leadership in customized solutions for clients, which is also referred to as a selective manufacturing strategy. Under this term Infineon meant the more intensive use of foundry services and direct investment in manufacturing facilities only for advanced products, in which it has a competitive edge;
Focus on the stability and consistency of revenue growth. Since the 2000s Infineon has been steadily shifting its focus from traditional DRAM and telecom segments to less cyclical, but promising automotive, power control and security applications resulting first in the separation of the memory division into a separate entity Qimonda in 2006 eventually filing for bankruptcy in 2009, and then the sale of phone division to Intel in 2011. 
As for the Asia-Pacific, its development followed the global goals and guidelines, but also had its specific features. In the 5-to-1 strategy announced in 2002 Infineon clearly committed to become №1 supplier in China while remaining its leading positions in Japan and the rest of Asia. This was the first time, when the company highlighted that Asia-Pacific would be the growth priority compared to Europe (Infineon, 2002). It had also to be considered that in the beginning of the 2000s there were local IDM manufacturers, namely from South Korea and Japan, which had an established regional reputation and client base on local market. Hence, to be able to successfully grow in the highly competitive environment Infineon developed the following pillars applied disregarding the application segment and the specific Asia-Pacific country:
Support of local growth.  After spin-off in 1999 trying to balance its growth Infineon made a priority for the automotive semiconductors on the APAC markets expecting it to become the largest producer of cars by 2010. Another important trend was the expansion of the local Chinese automotive manufacturers, which increased their markets share from 28% to 35% by 2010 (Chong, 2008). The strategy of Infineon was to jointly work with these specific types of companies and become their supplier. In 2023 the share of local automotive brands in China was to surpass 50% (Reuters, 2023), while Infineon was the supplier for almost all of them, including the EV segment. 
The same principles were applied while expanding to industrial power control, green energy and IoT segments, which also were the important component of Infineon’s regional growth. 
Balanced time-to-market. Infineon created a regional manufacturing and R&D hub supported by the network of regional scientific facilities and plants to excel in local expertise and be able to quickly react on the demand changes. The APAC largest factory in the Malaysian Kulim has gone through the modernization and expansion waves in 2006 and 2021, which enabled it to become the largest automotive and power IC manufacturing facility in the entire Asia (Infineon, 2006). The plant location in Malaysia has enabled the company to achieve the reasonable lead-time and the access to qualified STEM workers, while avoiding the geopolitical risks related to Taiwan. As a result, the new $7 billion investment project announced in 2022 already has a large pool of Chinese clients including Chery and SAIC (Infineon, 2023). The regional HQ, R&D hub and another plant are in the nearby Singapore, which also received a massive investment to increase expertise in target applications. 
At the same time, Infineon has created the network of regional wafer and OSAT plants closely integrated with the owned R&D centers. For instance, following the growth in China Infineon established the automotive and industrial IC design center in Xian in 2004. It also implied the partnership with Xian Jiaotong University and Xian University on joint research and STEM worker’s supply. After that, in 2011 it opened the cluster with manufacturing and R&D facilities in Beijing for power semiconductors and expanded the factory in Wuxi in 2015 (Infineon 2010, 2015). The similar sites were also opened in South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan. 
Creation of joint ventures with strategic end clients. Infineon is actively involved in manufacturing and R&D JVs in the APAC. First, this has been driven by its global strategy of transforming into ready solutions provider. Second, this was a way to establish the lasting presence on lucrative, but competitive markets. Third, the features of the APAC business culture imply the creation of long-term cooperative relations, while assuming the high costs of foreignness. The establishment of such long-term commitments has enabled Infineon the mitigate these barriers, while being able to provide the pioneering tailored solution for its customers on the key end markets. Some prominent examples of such ventures are presented in Table 10.
Table 9.
Examples of joint ventures of Infineon in APAC
Source: compiled by the authors based on ET Auto (2023), Infineon (2020), Infineon (2024), Statista (2024).

Investment in GR. Infineon is known for investment .in GR and support of national policies to get access to contracts from the state-backed companies. For instance, it became the supplier for the first project in South Korea introducing payment cards to the public transport in 2004. Another and more strategic collaboration happened between Infineon and the PRC government. The company has been an active supporter of the CPC incentives and policies. In 2003, when Infineon still had a memory division, it made a partially state-owned SMIC an exclusive foundry for its DRAM products and 300nm know-hows. In 2008 it also supported a fully state-owned automotive company Changan by joint development of the hybrid engines for its cars. Vehicles served as a taxi for the guest of the Beijing Olympics in 2008, while Infineon has been the Changang’s supplier since then. As a result of fruitful cooperation with state enterprises Infineon was selected as the exclusive supplier of microcontrollers for the new series of the Chinese passports with 6,5 million pieces annually. It has contributed to the annual increase in sales by $66 million between 2009 and 2010 (Infineon, 2010). The company has also been spotted as an active supporter of Made in China 2025 strategy and the government’s green initiatives. As a result, in 2023 it was the №1 MCU and other SiC supplier of all the major state-owned automotive companies (SAIC, Changan, Chery), railway (CRRC) as well as other minor applications. 
Work with reputation. Infineon understood that the positioning of its key APAC clients like Toyota and Hyundai (especially in 2010s) as reliable car-manufacturers for the middle class required zero tolerance to defects (Chong, 2008). As a result, minimizing errors in its automotive SiCs became one of Infineons’ TOP strategic tasks achieved via the network of its local independent and joint R&D centers like the one with Hyundai Motors. As the outcome of its products development Infineon has managed to become the first non-Japanese company to receive the highest quality level award by Toyota (Infineon, 2012). The acknowledgement was continued on the annual basis and was strengthened by the awards of Hyundai, which named called it the partner of the year in 2022 (Infineon, 2022). Currently Infineon is actively marketing such achievements. This made possible for Infineon to prolong its long-term contracts not only with Hyundai and Toyota, but also with the pool of the Chinese car-manufacturing including the EV companies like BYD, as they see Toyota and Hyundai awards as benchmarks.
In the outcome of the abovementioned features synergy, Infineon has been able to completely change the share of the Asia-Pacific in its portfolio. While in 1999 only 20% of the revenue came from there, the figure grew to 41,3% by 2010 and peaked at 61% in 2020. In absolute terms it meant the revenue growth from EUR 827 million to EUR 8,95 billion in 1999-2020. In 2023 this was an even higher figure of EUR 9,56 billion (Infineon, 2024). Over the last decades the regions has also demonstrated the fastest growth compared to EMEA and the America, which could be also the result of the strategy undertaken by Infineon. 
Table 10.
Infineon revenue CAGR by region, 2013-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and Infineon financial statements.

The company has also managed to become the TOP automotive semiconductors supplier China and South Korea, while remaining on the 2nd place in Japan. All the mentioned above proves that the growth strategy of Infineon on the Asia-Pacific market was effective and has driven the long-term development of the whole corporation.

2.3. The case of NXP Semiconductors on the foreign markets of the Asia-Pacific
NXP Semiconductors is a Netherlands-based international IDM company founded in 2006 as a spin-off from Philips. In 2023 NXP Semiconductors was ranked among the TOP-10 IDMs globally with the revenue reaching $13,276 billion (NXP Semiconductors, 2024). The majority of sales (52%) was generated in the automotive application followed by IoT, mobile and communication infrastructure making up 21%, 12% and 15% respectively. Such distribution of end markets resembles the one of Infineon and both companies are competing the most in automotive ICs. 
Graph 15.

2023 NXP Semiconductors sales by end market, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on NXP (2023)

NXP Semiconductors does not provide the exact information about the market share of its products. Nevertheless, one could still trace some data about its competitive position in numerous product groups. Currently it has the world’s largest market share in microcontrollers (MCUs) with 16,6% in 2022. This was equal to $4,46 billion or 34% of the total revenue over the year. Other products of high importance include application processors, analog products, radio frequency devices and sensors. There is also a small segment of security controllers, where NXP Semiconductors holds strong positions and effectively competes with Infineon. 
The advancements in the abovementioned segments, especially MCUs and IoT chips have driven the company’s revenue over the last decade. The graph below illustrates that the company was able to show the consistent growth in most of the observed years, but 2017 and 2019-2020, which resulted in the total expansion by 179% in 2013-2023. There was also a sharp revenue increase by 56% observed in 2016, which was related to the merger with Freescale Semiconductor. 
Graph 16. 

2013-2023 NXP Semiconductors annual revenue (USD billion) and YoY change (%)
Source: compiled by the authors based on Infineon annual reports and authors’ calculations. 

Other financial have also shown the significant improvement over the recent years, which proves the high-quality of corporate growth measured not only in sales. 
Table 11. 
NXP Semiconductors major financial indicators change in 2013-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and NXP Semiconductors financial statements

The more detailed analysis of the key financial metrics also demonstrates the consistent and rapid paces of growth, which is especially true for EBITDA, operating profit and net income. The faster improvement of the abovementioned metrics is substantiated by the positive 10-yaer dynamics of the quick ratios. 
Table 12. 
Infineon margins and their change in 2013-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and NXP Semiconductors financial statements

The regional dimension shows the critical importance of the Asia-Pacific market for NXP Semiconductors, as the company earned around 67% of its total revenue there, which is a decrease in comparison to 2013 when it reported the figure of 68% excluding Japan. Hence, based on the assumptions from 2015, the total APAC impact on corporate sales could be around 73%. 
 If dived deeper, China was the largest destination accounting for around 36% of total sales. However, it is noted that the country’s share in portfolio declined by 7 p.p. over the decade despite growing in the absolute numbers. Singapore came the second making up over 11% of the revenue of $1,5 billion. Its share has remained relatively stable staying in the 9%-12% corridor during the observed periods. Other Asia-Pacific countries were less important for NXP Semiconductors with Japan and South Korea, for instance, making up just 7% and 5% of global revenue accordingly. 
Graph 17.

NXP Semiconductors regional distribution of sales in 2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on NXP (2024)

After the spin-off from Philips in 2006 NXP Semiconductors used product development strategy with strong emphasis on the R&D. Unlike Infineon, which had a primary focus on the car segment, NXP Semiconductors had a broader product portfolio, from which it was trying to take an advantage of. The clear rising stars of the company included its IoT, security, payment, and automotive solutions, which had a high sales potential on the APAC market. 
According to OICA (2023) data, the Asia-Pacific has been the fastest growing region in terms of car manufacturing. In 2006-2023 it has expanded by 92% compared to the 35% globally. Overall, the regional share in the global automotive supply increased from 36% to 51% over the same period. The paces of growth have been notably high in China (leader in absolute terms, +320% or 23 million vehicles) and Indonesia (+370%), while Japan and South Korea were stable as second and third largest manufacturers respectively. The attractiveness was also spurred by the growth in popularity of local car brands, the increased growth of EVs and the electrification of cars. 
Industrial and IoT solutions was another target growth segment in the APAC with China being the regional and global market leader controlling over 32% (NXP Semiconductors, 2016). As the industry still was in the beginning of the widescale growth, NXP also had to secure the leadership in the area. 
Finally, there was a security and payment solutions, which company promoted on together with local government and mobile phone producers. Since the global emergence of smartphones in the 2000s APAC has become the leader in digital payment systems with almost 1,4 billion users in 2023 (BPC, 2023). 
Creation of joint ventures with strategic end clients. Like Infineon, NXP actively used joint R&D ventures and strategic partnerships to customize its solutions and secure the supply for the large-scale companies with high growth prospective. The illustration of this strategy could be the automotive and IoT segments in the PRC. In 2014 NXP created a JV with Datang Telecom Technology to develop solutions for EVs, which had a 70% CAGR between 2014 and 2024 (NXP Semiconductors, 2014). This step was later followed by SP with Tongji University and SAIC in 2016 to perform the large-scale road tests of the car connectivity devices (NXP Semiconductors, 2016). Later on, the CIG Group with Changan and Newsoft was created to jointly develop the automotive and industrial solutions, while the same kind of partnership was additionally created with Geely in 2017. NXP has also created a network of partnerships with the local companies in the fields of e-cockpits like the ones with Dongfeng Venecia in 2019 or the installment of several millions of jointly developed e-cockpit solution together with Alibaba by 2020. 
Besides, NXP has been a supporter of the local autonomous driving initiatives. For instance, it partnered with Hitachi Solutions in Japan, LG in South Korea, and Baidu Apollo project in China to deliver chips for the highly prospective applications. 
In IoT NXP also chose the pave of SPs. Over the recent decade, it has managed to have the most fruitful cooperation with Xiaomi. It began in 2016 with joint development of smart home connectivity solutions, which resulted in NXP products being places in almost all ecosystem Xiaomi devices by today. Companies have also managed to achieve partnership in secured payment projects in devices like MI10 smartphone and smart watches (NXP Semiconductors, n.d.). 
As a result, NXP has managed to become the 2nd largest IC supplier to the Chinese automotive companies after Infineon and the leader in MCUs. At the same time, it is the leading provider of the IoT solutions for the fast-growing local markets. 
Investment in GR.  Like Infineon, NXP was trying to build stable relations with local authorities to ensure the ties with policymakers and companies. This was done by the company due to the high role of state enterprises in automotive, banking and infrastructure markets, hence this step could grant the access to more partners for the supply. For this purpose NXP partnered with JAC Capital, a state-owned foundation with strong distribution channels and expertise on automotive market (NXP Semiconductors, 2015). Besides, it the first foreign semiconductor company, which got its devices approved to be used by UnionPay (NXP Semiconductors, 2015). It enabled NXP to expand the network of partnerships in China including the 2016 NFC project with Xiaomi. 
Moving to the operational results in the APAC, it could be calculated that APAC still was the fastest-growing market for NXP in 2006-2013. However, after the merger with Freescale Semiconductor the expansion slowed down. This partly could be explained by the sharp increase of sales in APAC in the absolute means from $4 billion to $6 billion in 2015-2016 (NXP Semiconductors, 2016). 
Table 13.
NXP Semiconductors CAGR by region 2006-2023, %
Source: compiled by the authors based on authors’ calculations and NXP Semiconductors financial statements

Combined with abovementioned data on regional distribution of sales, it could be also seen that it has growth significantly over the latest years. However, after peaking in 2016 it has been declining steadily due to the expansion to the American and European markets. Hence, the growth strategy of NXP in APAC could be named successful, but with numerous limitations compared to Infineon. 
From the prospective of features, NXP demonstrated the similar behavior to Infineon. However, it had focus on a broader product portfolio and utilized a less centralized approach to regional R&D.
Chapter 3. Findings and recommendations
Key research findings
In research we have identified that international companies are using mixed types of growth strategies combining both organic and inorganic means. This is also true for semiconductor companies in the Asia-Pacific, as they have not only to keep up with Moore’s law and grow faster than competitors in the rapidly developing industry, but also increase market shares and sales on the key regional markets. 
From the organic perspective, semiconductor companies usually utilize the product development strategy. It is supported by massive internal R&D expenses and investment in the construction of R&D centers in target countries to better understand the local requirements and customize the product. The need for customization is especially high in analog, sensor and discrete microdevices, which have the wide scale of narrower applications. Asia-Pacific is no exclusion here, but by the example of Infineon and NXP Semiconductors 2 slightly different approaches might be found. In case of Infineon the regional R&D hub was established in Singapore for the creation of internal expertise center, while the network of smaller sites was created regionally for on-site cooperation and better market understanding. At the same time, NXP Semiconductors followed a less centralized approach by creating a network of local R&D centers with certain specializations. This might better fit the company’s needs, as it is operating in the wider number of segments. 
Another feature of Asia-Pacific organic growth strategy lies in manufacturing investment. If in EMEA or North America IDMs usually began their market expansion by constructing a wafer fabrication facility, in APAC it is vice versa. Semiconductor manufacturers first build OSAT facilities to perform the final and least technologically intensive stage, and only after creating a pool of loyal clients they venture on own foundry business. 
Besides, semiconductor companies, especially on automotive and personal electronics end markets, are actively utilizing B2B marketing tools to create a reputation of a reliable and progressive supplier. For instance, Infineon and NXP Semiconductors are promoting the supplier rewards from Toyota and Hyundai Motors and participate in events like 2008 Beijing Olympics with co-branded products. 
Moreover, due to the higher role of government in Chinese and some other Asia-Pacific economies, the utilization of internal GR resources and support of national political agenda is required for semiconductor players. This feature is particularly important for Infineon and NXP Semiconductors, as local automotive, industrial power control and security payment markets are to the large extend controlled by state-owned enterprises. 
From the inorganic perspective, the observed companies also followed the same patterns as globally tending to create joint ventures, strategic alliances and partnerships more often than conducting M&As. In case of Infineon and NXP Semiconductors only 1 local acquisition was observed in 2004. However, in terms of partnerships the narrower scope of their types was noticed in Asia-Pacific than globally. The case study illustrates that semiconductor firms in automotive, industrial power control and secure payment markets tend to cooperate with others primarily in terms of R&D and jointly create tailored solutions for future products. This strategy enables Western companies to utilize their expertise and develop their growing client on expanding markets. As a result, this helps to secure the larger future contracts. This might be exemplified by the strategy of Infineon in APAC automotive segment, which helped it to become the top-1 supplier of car semiconductors. 
In numerous cases semiconductor companies in the Asia-Pacific might create manufacturing and R&D joint ventures with their clients to produce exclusive products. This was done by both Infineon and NXP Semiconductors in IoT and automotive segments specifically. It is also should be noticed that semiconductor firms act as the minority parties in such JVs.
The detailed comparison of previous findings in literature and within the research is presented in the table below. 
Table 14.
Comparison of research findings and literature review
Source: compiled by the authors


Recommendations for international semiconductor companies
As our research has demonstrated, semiconductor companies operate in a complex and highly competitive markets with short product lifecycle. This is especially true for the Asia-Pacific region, where most of the ICs are produced and sold. To achieve stably high paces of expansion this study recommends the following:
Pursue the product development strategy and customize goods for the needs of local clients. This could be realized via the network of R&D centers, which might support in understanding the local needs and provide the on-site expertise. 
Place emphasis on time-to-market optimization. Since most of the large IDM companies are extensively present on the Asia-Pacific market, the ability to deliver the cutting-edge solutions faster than competitors would support the attraction of large companies. 
Invest in strategic partnerships and joint ventures with promising clients. The Asia-Pacific region includes numerous countries with large domestic markets and higher than average global paces of growth. Hence, new companies emerging there might become the rising stars and occupy the potentially large niches. By creating strategic partnerships and co-inventing solutions for such promising applications international semiconductor companies might secure long-term sales prospects. 
Pay attention to cooperation with local governments, especially in China. In Asia-Pacific state-backed companies are playing a significant role in domestic economies, which is especially true for automotive, secure payments, energetics, and telecom sectors. If semiconductor company enables to establish the relations of mutual trust with local authorities, it might grant a direct access to the abovementioned end markets. 
Despite China is currently the largest IC market in the Asia-Pacific, it is worth considering Japan and South Korea in marketing new solutions in the traditional automotive industry. Local companies like Toyota and Hyundai Motors are still viewed as regional benchmark for the Chinese manufacturers. Besides, they have a wide lane upper-middle and premium cars, which require more intensive use if electronics. Nevertheless, China is catching-up and already leading in EVs. As a result, managers should pay attention to balancing these countries.
Utilize the corporate cross-product expertise for exploring new opportunities in China. The cases shown in the research indicated that the corporate expertise of NXP Semiconductors in analog and sensor semiconductors has enabled it to partner with local players in the field of IoT. At the same time expertise of Infineon in power control devices gave it access to the fastest growing EV market in China and green energy projects. 


Limitations and recommendations for further researchers
This piece of research has numerous limitations, which should be considered by scholars and industry professionals.
First, this research reviewed IDM companies, which does not allow to use the outcomes for foundries, fabless and OSAT companies.
Second, due to the limitations in data growth strategies in China, Japan, South Korea, Singapore and partially Malaysia were primarily explored. However, there are numerous other local markets like Philippines and Vietnam, where the outcomes might differ. 
Third, this research studied IDM companies on the semiconductor market of Asia-Pacific as a whole. However, if the analysis of growth strategies in the specific segment is performed, there might be more features found.
Fourth, there is limited data available on the financial performance of specific JVs and SPs, which also puts certain constraints on our availability of assessing growth strategies. 
Sixth, despite this research used the mix of qualitative and quantitative methods, no own financial model was presented, which might predict the possible paces of business growth for Infineon and NXP Semiconductors in future. 
Hence, based on the abovementioned limitations of the research we would recommend scholars to continue research in the following directions.
Elaborate more on features of growth strategies of semiconductor companies in the specific countries of the Asia-Pacific with special focus on the Philippines, Vietnam, Thailand, and Malaysia. 
Prepare the likewise research for companies operating in foundry, fabless and OSAT businesses. 
Dive deeper into the specifics of IDM growth strategies on the end markets of the APAC. 

Conclusion
The goal of this research was to determine the features of semiconductor companies’ growth strategies in the Asia-Pacific and illustrate them by the case study of Infineon and NXP Semiconductors. As a result, we were able to find out that there are numerous features in organic strategies, which include the more intensive use of GR and product marketing, steeper approach to investment in own manufacturing facilities expansion, and the utilization of 2 possible R&D modes varying in the degree of centralization. From the inorganic perspective, semiconductor companies in the Asia-Pacific often created strategic partnerships and joint ventures with companies in promising segments to jointly develop the market and increase sales. This was especially true for automotive, IoT and secure payment applications. Those markets in the APAC are considered rapidly developing, which makes such partnerships a useful tool to increase sales and create long-term contracts. Moreover, partnerships with governmental institutions were actively used by manufacturers to grow in sensitive segments like payment and create the clusters with educational organization to mitigate the STEM workers deficit. 
From the wider perspective, this study demonstrated that IDM companies operating in semiconductor industry tend to use similar combinations of growth strategies. For organic those include product development and customization via R&D network, while modernization might additionally be used. From the inorganic perspective, the intensive application of strategic alliances and the creation of joint ventures are widely applied, while M&A activity is lower compared to other technological industries. This is a result of the industry characteristics: short product cycle, knowledge and capital intensity of production and strong competitive landscape. 
The findings in this paper not only correspond to those in literature, but enrich it with the new features, which could be applied specifically for the IDM manufacturers. Information provided in the research sheds the light on the strategic approaches undertaken by Infineon and NXP Semiconductors, which were among the few companies with both positive revenue and EPS CAGR in the Asia-Pacific. Hence, it might be used by managers of other semiconductor device manufacturers to adjust their regional growth strategies in a more effective way. 
The value of this study for the scientific community is that it narrows down the research gap in knowledge of features of semiconductor companies’ growth strategies in the Asia-Pacific region, especially of the European-based IDMs. However, there are still numerous limitations presented. Since fabless companies and foundries were not in the focus of this analysis, the outcomes of this paper could not be fully applied to these operational models. Besides, there were numerous constraints related to the availability of data and methods applied. Hence, our recommendations would be to carry out the similar analysis for semiconductor companies with other operating modes and cross-check the outcomes with those of this research. Scholars might also elaborate on the features of growth strategies on the specific end markets of APAC. 
Overall, this paper has been able to achieve to goals stated, perform the tasks and answer the research question. The outcomes facilitate the scientific community in narrowing down the research gap, while managers might use it while making decisions on the APAC strategy. 


References
2023 Production Statistics. (2024). OICA. https://www.oica.net
About TSMC. (2024). TSMC. https://www.tsmc.com/ 
Ahlsten. (2023). Anatomy of a Semiconductor Cycle. Parnassus Investment. Retrieved May 2, 2024, from https://www.parnassus.com/updates/article/anatomy_of_a_semiconductor_cycle_52e890f 
Annual Report (2002). Infineon. https://www.infineon.com/dgdl/IFX_AnnualReport2001_onForm20F_complete.pdf?fileId=5546d4616e651704016e69e5d067002f 
Annual Report (2010). Infineon. https://www.infineon.com/dgdl/IFX_GB2010_en.pdf?fileId=db3a30432d081e66012d0e7e5fff35fa 
Annual Report. (2020). Infineon. https://www.infineon.com
Annual Report. (2024). Infineon. https://www.infineon.com/dgdl/Infineon+Annual+Report+2023.pdf?fileId=8ac78c8b8b657de2018bfceb193d00a8 
Annual report. (2024). Intel. https://www.intc.com/filings-reports/annual-reports/content/0000050863-24-000010/0000050863-24-000010.pdf 
Annual Report. (2024). Texas Instruments. https://investor.ti.com/static-files/da76e2ef-8b59-4baf-ba53-9558512a7191 
AR/VR Chip Market Size to Reach USD 29.4 Billion By 2032 CAGR: 23.2%. Report By DataHorizzon Research. (2023). Yahoo Finance. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/ar-vr-chip-market-size-233000786.html 
Aspelund, A., Azari, M. J., Aglen, A. F., & Graff, S. G. (2017, June 24). The birth and development of a born global industry: The case of microelectronics in Norway. Journal of International Entrepreneurship. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10843-017-0206-3
Bahadir, S. C., Bharadwaj, S., & Parzen, M. (2009). A meta-analysis of the determinants of organic sales growth. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 26(4), 263–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2009.06.003
Byun, B. M., & Ahn, B. H. (1989, December). Growth of the Korean semiconductor industry and its competitive strategy in the world market. Technovation, 9(8), 635–656. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-4972(89)90004-7
Chang, P., & Hsu, C. (1998). The Development Strategies for Taiwan’s Semiconductor Industry. IEEE Transctions of Engineering Management, 45(4), 349-356. 
Chiang, S. (2024). Chip giant TSMC opens first Japan factory as it diversifies away from Taiwan amid U.S.-China tensions. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com 
China Chip Imports Suffer Steepest Drop on Record After US Curbs. (2024). Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-01-15/us-china-chip-war-china-sees-biggest-drop-in-imports-on-record-in-2023 
China’s semiconductor industry: Seeking for self-sufficiency amid global political tensions. (2024). Daxue Consulting. https://daxueconsulting.com/china-semiconductor-industry/ 
Chong., A. (2008).  The Growth of Automotive Electronics In APAC, The Next Frontier. Infineon. https://www.infineon.com/export/sites/default/cn/drivingasia_chap1.pdf 
Chuang, Y. T., Dahlin, K. B., Thomson, K., Lai, Y. C., & Yang, C. C. (2015, November 13). Multimarket Contact, Strategic Alliances, and Firm Performance. Journal of Management, 44(4), 1551–1572.
Custodio, R. (2012). Mergers and acquisitions : ARM takeover by Intel. http://hdl.handle.net/10400.14/9526 
Deloitte. (2019). Rise of The “Big 4” The Semiconductor Industry in The Asia-Pacific. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/cn-tmt-rise-of-the-big-4-en-082820.pdf 
Durmaz, Y., & Ilhan, A. (2016). A Theoretical Approach to Purpose and Type of Strategy. International Journal of Business and Management, 10(4). https://doi.org/10.5539/ijbm.v10n4p210
Gerald, A., & Elisifa, N. (2013). Analysis of Business Growth Strategies and Their Contribution to Business Growth: a Tanzania Case Study. International Journal of Economics, Commerce and Management, 1(1), 1-14.
Global Analog IC Market to Achieve $120 Billion Valuation by 2030: Robust CAGR of 7.5% Propelled by IoT Adoption and Technological Innovation. (2023). Yahoo Finance. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/global-analog-ic-market-achieve-001500686.html# 
Global Interface IP Strategic Business Report 2023: A $2.1 Billion Market by 2030 with Focus on Key Players - Synopsys, Mentor, a Siemens Business, Rambus, & eSilicon. (2023). Yahoo Finance. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/global-interface-ip-strategic-business-072800739.html?guccounter=1 
Grimes, S., & Du, D. (2022, March). China’s emerging role in the global semiconductor value chain. Telecommunications Policy, 46(2), 101959. 
Huang, Y. (2022). Research on the Motivation of Overseas M&A—Taking WingTech Acquired Allianz as an Example. Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Economics, Smart Finance and Contemporary Trade (ESFCT 2022), 649–656. https://doi.org/10.2991/978-94-6463-052-7_75
Hyundai, Kia in long-term pact with Infineon for automotive power modules, chips. (2023). ET Auto. https://auto.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/auto-components/hyundai-kia-in-long-term-pact-with-infineon-for-automotive-power-modules-chips/104532141 
IDC Analysis: Intel Expands Market Opportunities. (2023). Intel. https://www.intc.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/1625/idc-analysis-intel-expands-market-opportunities 
Infineon. (2002). Infineon launches its "Agenda 5-to1" program outlining its strategy for future growth [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-infineon/press/press-releases/2002/128495.html 
Infineon. (2006). Infineon Officially Opens First Asia-Based Front-End Fab in Malaysia; US $1 Billion Investment Power Plant for Industrial and Automotive Chips [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com
Infineon. (2011). Infineon to Establish New Entity in China Meeting the Growing Demand for Energy Efficiency and Electromobility Solutions [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-infineon/press/press-releases/2011/INFXX201101-017.html 
Infineon. (2012). Infineon Receives Zero-Defect Quality Award from Toyota Hirose Plant for the Sixth Time [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com
Infineon. (2015). Infineon Builds a New Factory in Wuxi to Accelerate Smart Manufacturing Initiative [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-infineon/press/press-releases/2015/INFXX201510-003.html 
Infineon. (2018). Infineon Technologies and SAIC Motor establish power module joint venture SIAPM in China to power the largest market for electric vehicles in the world [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com
Infineon. (2022) Hyundai Motor Group honors Infineon for supply competence and strategic cooperation for electric cars [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-infineon/press/press-releases/2022/INFATV202204-067.html#:~:text=In%20early%202019%2C%20Infineon%20was,of%20the%20Hyundai%20Motor%20Group. 
Infineon. (2023). Infineon to build the world’s largest 200-millimeter SiC Power Fab in Kulim, Malaysia, leading to total revenue potential of about seven billion euros by the end of the decade [Press release]. https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-infineon/press/press-releases/2023/INFXX202308-140.html 
Intel to quadruple cutting-edge chip packaging capacity by 2025. (2023). Nikkei Asia. https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Tech/Semiconductors/Intel-to-quadruple-cutting-edge-chip-packaging-capacity-by-2025 
Intel’s new Chinese chip innovation centre is a collaboration with a Shenzhen district, deepening ties amid US scrutiny. (2023). South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com
International Trade Administration, (2023). South Korea Semiconductors. https://www.trade.gov/market-intelligence/south-korea-semiconductors 
Jeong, H. (2024). Analyzing South Korea’s Semiconductor Industry: Trade Dynamics and Global Position. World Economy Brief, 14(8), 1-17
Jie, N. (2016). Analysis on Marketing Case of Intel Electronic Products. 6th International Conference on Electronic, Mechanical, Information and Management, Shenyang, China. https://www.atlantis-press.com/proceedings/emim-16/25853446 
Junni, P., & Teerikangas, S. (2019, April 26). Mergers and Acquisitions. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Business and Management. 
Kapoor, R. (2013, August). Persistence of Integration in the Face of Specialization: How Firms Navigated the Winds of Disintegration and Shaped the Architecture of the Semiconductor Industry. Organization Science, 24(4), 1195–1213. 
Khan, A. A. (2011). Merger and Acquisitions (M&As) in the Indian Banking Sector in Post Liberalization Regime. International Journal of Contemporary Business Studies, 2(11), 31-45. 
KPMG. (2023). Global semiconductor industry outlook for 2024. https://kpmg.com/us/en/articles/2024/global-semiconductor-industry-outlook.html 
Lau, C. H., & Michie, J. (2022). Penrose’s theory of the firm in an era of globalisation. International Review of Applied Economics, 1–20. 
Lee, S. (2011). Dynamic Capabilities at Samsung Electronics: Analysis of its Growth Strategy In Semiconductors. KDI School of Public Policy and Management. 
Leibovici, F., & Dunn, J. (2022). U.S. Trade of Semiconductors: Cross-Country Patterns and Historical Dynamics. Economic Synopses, 2022(31). 
Li, S. (2023). Semiconductor downturn may be near a trough, but the near-term recovery is far from robust. Oxford Economics. https://www.oxfordeconomics.com/resource/semiconductor-downturn-may-be-near-a-trough-but-the-near-term-recovery-is-far-from-robust/ 
Loe., M. (2024). Just a sleeping giant? Japan ready to reclaim semiconductor superstardom. T_HQ. https://techhq.com/2024/01/how-can-semiconductor-industry-in-japan-make-a-comeback/ 
Lu, M. (2024). Advanced Semiconductor Market Share by Country (2023-2027F). Visual Capitalist. https://www.visualcapitalist.com/advanced-semiconductor-market-share-2023-2027/ 
McGregor. (2021). Intel Invests $20 Billion In 2 New Arizona Fabs. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com
McKinsey. (2016). Winning through M&amp;A? Deal making in the semiconductor sector. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/semiconductors/our-insights/winning-through-m-and-a-deal-making-in-the-semiconductor-sector 
McKinsey. (2022). Strategies to lead in the semiconductor world. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/semiconductors/our-insights/strategies-to-lead-in-the-semiconductor-world
McKinsey. (2022). The semiconductor decade: A trillion-dollar industry. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/semiconductors/our-insights/the-semiconductor-decade-a-trillion-dollar-industry 
McKinsey. (2024). McKinsey on Semiconductors. https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/semiconductors/our%20insights/mckinsey%20on%20semiconductors%202024/mck_semiconductors_2024_webpdf.pdf
Micron acquires bankrupt Elpida Memory for $2.5 billion. (2012). Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/idUS3026905004/ 
Micron. (2016). Micron Technology Completes Acquisition of Inotera Memories of Taiwan [Press release]. https://investors.micron.com
Micron. (2023). Micron Technology, Inc. Reports Results for the Fourth Quarter and Full Year of Fiscal 2023 [Press release]. https://investors.micron.com
Miller, C. (2022). Chip War. Simon and Schuster. http://books.google.ie/books?id=JH-HEAAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=9781982172008&hl=&cd=1&source=gbs_api 
NAND Flash Memory Market to Hit US$ 104.86 Billion By 2030, Predicts Consegic Business Intelligence. (2023). Yahoo Finance. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/nand-flash-memory-market-hit-160000610.html 
NXP. (2014). Datang NXP Semiconductors Opens Its Doors for Business in China [Press release]. https://www.nxp.com/company/about-nxp/datang-nxp-semiconductors-opens-its-doors-for-business-in-china:NW-DATANG-BUSINESS-CHINA 
NXP. (2015). NXP and JAC Capital Complete Bipolar Power JV Following Regulatory Approvals [Press release]. www.nxp.com/company
NXP. (2015). NXP Receives China UnionPay Secure Product Certification [Press release]. https://www.nxp.com/company/about-nxp/nxp-receives-china-unionpay-secure-product-certification:NW-CHINA-UNION-PAY 
NXP. (2024). NXP Semiconductors Reports Fourth Quarter and Full-Year 2023 Results [Press release]. https://media.nxps.com
NXP. (2024). NXP, Tongji University, SAIC and Partners Launch First Large-Scale Road Test for Intelligent Connected Vehicles in China [Press release]. https://www.nxp.com
Optoelectronics Market Poised for Impressive 9.3% CAGR Growth, Valued at US$ 95.3 Billion in 2030 - Predicts Reports Insights. (2023). Yahoo Finance. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/optoelectronics-market-poised-impressive-9-140000102.html 
Penrose, E. (1959) The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Pettey C., & Meulen R. (2018). Gartner Says Worldwide Semiconductor Revenue Forecast to Grow 7.5 Percent in 2018. Gartner. https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2018-01-15-gartner-says-worldwide-semiconductor-revenue-forecast-to-grow-75-percent-in-2018 
Poitiers, N. and P. Weil (2021) 'A new direction for the European Union’s half-hearted semiconductor strategy', Policy Contribution 17/2021, Bruegel
Qiao, G., & Lu, Y. (2024). Operating Efficiency in the Capital-Intensive Semiconductor Industry: A Nonparametric Frontier Approach. Economics, 18(1). https://doi.org/10.1515/econ-2022-0050 
Rasiah, R., Kong, X., Lin Y., & Song, J. (2008, September 22). Explaining variations in semiconductor catch-up strategies in China, Korea, Malaysia and Taiwan. In Globelics. Retrieved May 2, 2024, from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47327504_Explaining_variations_in_semiconductor_catch-up_strategies_in_China_Korea_Malaysia_and_Taiwan 
Reuters. (2023). Chinese automakers to take majority of home market for first time, forecast says. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/business/autos-transportation/chinese-automakers-take-majority-home-market-first-time-forecast-2023-07-05/ 
Reuters. (2023). Exclusive: China to launch $40 billion state fund to boost chip industry. (2023). https://www.reuters.com/technology/china-launch-new-40-bln-state-fund-boost-chip-industry-sources-say-2023-09-05/ 
Reuters. (2023). Texas Instruments plans up to $1 bln investment to expand Philippine facilities. https://www.reuters.com/business/texas-instruments-plans-up-1-bln-investment-expand-philippine-facilities-2023-08-10/ 
Ryu, S., Kwak, K., & Lee, S. (2023). The Growth Patterns of Firms in the Industrial Value Chain Using the Hidden Markov Model: Evidence from the Korean Semiconductor Industry. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4612351
Semiconductor companies market revenue worldwide from 2009 to 2023. (2024). Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/270590/global-revenue-generated-by-semiconductor-vendors-since-2009/ 
Semiconductor foundry market to grow at a CAGR of 7.74% by 2027: North America is estimated to account for 40% of the growth – Technavio. (2023). Yahoo Finance. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/semiconductor-foundry-market-grow-cagr-041500174.html 
Semiconductor Industry Association (2024). Global Semiconductor Sales Decrease 8.2% in 2023; Market Rebounds Late in Year. https://www.semiconductors.org/global-semiconductor-sales-decrease-8-2-in-2023-market-rebounds-late-in-year/
Semiconductor Industry Association Factbook. (2024). Semiconductor Industry Association. https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/SIA-2023-Factbook_1.pdf
Semiconductor Industry Association. (2021). SIA WHITEPAPER: TAKING STOCK OF CHINA’S SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY. https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Taking-Stock-of-China’s-Semiconductor-Industry_final.pdf 
Semiconductor market revenue worldwide from 2020 to 2025, by end market. (2023). Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/498265/cagr-main-semiconductor-target-markets/ 
Semiconductor Sensor Market Size, Share, Report 2024-32. (2023). Imarc Group. htttps://www.imarcgroup.com 
Shao, B., Asatani, K., & Sakata, I. (2019). Analysis of Mergers and Acquisitions Trends in the Semiconductor Industry with the Technology Perspective. 2019 Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology (PICMET). https://doi.org/10.23919/picmet.2019.8893782 
Simons, C. (2024). 2024 semiconductor industry outlook. Deloitte United States. https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/technology-media-and-telecommunications/articles/semiconductor-industry-outlook.html
Singh., M., Sargent, J. F. S., & Sutter, K. M. (2023). Semiconductors and the Semiconductor Industry. Congressional Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/r/r47508 
SK Hynix to buy Intel's NAND memory unit for $9bn. (2020). Nikkei Asia. https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Business-deals/SK-Hynix-to-buy-Intel-s-NAND-memory-unit-for-9bn 
South Korea invests big in becoming a global chip leader. (2024). DW. https://www.dw.com/en/south-korea-invests-big-in-becoming-a-global-chip-leader/a-68073870 
Statista. (2024). Semiconductors – Worldwide. https://www.statista.com/outlook/tmo/semiconductors/worldwide 
Taiwan braced for further water shortages in its chipmaking hubs. (2023). Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/397868d0-6051-4b22-ae9f-60fd67317861 
Taiwan says awaiting US announcement on China chip waiver extension. (2023). Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/technology/taiwan-says-awaiting-us-announcement-china-chip-waiver-extension-2023-10-12/ 
The Economist. (2023). Taiwan’s dominance of the chip industry makes it more important. www.economist.com 
Tochiyabashi, N., & Kutty, N. (2023). How Japan’s semiconductor industry is moving into the future. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/11/how-japan-s-semiconductor-industry-is-leaping-into-the-future/ 
U.S. aims to hobble China's chip industry with sweeping new export rules. (2022). Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/technology/us-aims-hobble-chinas-chip-industry-with-sweeping-new-export-rules-2022-10-07/ 
UMC. (2009). UMC Shareholders Approve the Acquisition of He Jian Technology (Suzhou) Co., Ltd. and Elect 11th term of Directors at Annual Shareholders Meeting [Press release]. www.umc.com
Wu, P., Yu, B., & Zhong, B. (2022, November 7). Analysis of Merger and Acquisition Motivation and Synergistic Effect of Enterprises. Frontiers in Business, Economics and Management, 6(1), 161–167.
Wu, S. Y., Hung, S. C., & Lin, B. W. (2006, May). Agile strategy adaptation in semiconductor wafer foundries: An example from Taiwan. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 73(4), 436–451.
Wu, Z. (2023, November 2). Analysis of Will’s Acquisition of Omnivision. Highlights in Business, Economics and Management, 19, 416–423.
Yahoo finance. (2024). Intel: The IDM 2.0 Transformation. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/intel-idm-2-0-transformation-140000992.html 
Yasuda, T. (2005). Firm Growth, Size, Age and Behavior in Japanese Manufacturing. Small Business Economics, 24, 1-15.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-005-7568-y 
Yu, S. (1998, December). The Growth Pattern of Samsung Electronics. International Studies of Management & Organization, 28(4), 57–72. https://doi.org/10.1080/00208825.1998.11656750
Zandt., F. (2023). Where Can the Most Chips Be Manufactured? Statista. www.statista.com
Zhang, J. (2019). China needs ‘five to 10 years’ to catch up in semiconductors, Peking University professor Zhou Zhiping says. South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/tech/tech-leaders-and-founders/article/3024315/china-needs-five-10-years-catch-semiconductors 