GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

FEDERAL STATE AUTONOMOUS EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION 
OF HIGH EDUCATION
NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY
HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

SCHOOL OF INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

MASTER OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS PROGRAM 

	





MASTER THESIS

Topic: Reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by oil and gas companies in developing countries exemplified by Chevron and Shell in Nigeria and Venezuela





                                                                                          Student 
             Alena Arkhipova
                                                                           
                                                                                         Research Advisor 
Nikita Nazarov 
Instructor of theoretical foundations 
of international business




Moscow 2024

Table of contents
 Introduction…………………………………………………………………….....3
Theoretical aspects of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by oil and gas companies in developing countries………………………………………………………………………..5 
Theoretical aspects of the process of internationalization…………............5 
Existing research on the process of internationalization of oil and gas companies………………………………………………………………...12
Existing research on the reasons for choosing international joint venture 
in the process of internationalization by oil and gas companies in developing countries………………………………………………….......18
Analysis of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by Chevron and Shell in Nigeria and Venezuela…….23
  Overview of oil and gas industry and market analysis…….……………..23
  Case study of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by Chevron in Nigeria and Venezuela…....33
  Case study of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by Shell in Nigeria and Venezuela.………42
3. Findings and recommendations for international oil and gas companies on the strategy choice in the process of internationalization in developing countries….49
  Research findings on the choice of strategy in the process of internationalization by international oil and gas companies…….……..….49
  Recommendations for international oil and gas companies in choosing strategy in the process of internationalization…………...………...………54
  Limitations and recommendations for further research on international joint venture choice………………………………………………………..57
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………….59
References……………………………………………………………………….60
Appendices……………………………………………………………………....74
Introduction

At a certain stage of its life, any firm is faced with the idea of developing a business in a foreign region. At the stage of internationalization, companies need to make the right choice between strategies. Sometimes, in the process of internationalization they decide to change their initial strategy to another one, in this particular work the strategy of international joint venture is researched. Operations in the foreign market is fraught with great risks, especially in industries such as oil and gas. Oil and gas projects are research- and capital-intensive, companies need to minimize risks as much as possible before starting a new project, especially in a foreign, not well-known region. Because of this fact many companies choose international joint ventures in order to share risks and high costs of the projects with the local partner (Stewart and Maughn 2011).

The situation becomes more complex when companies enter developing countries as their political and economic environments tend to be more complicated. The topic of joint ventures is widely researched, however, the exact reasons for choosing IJV at the certain stage of the internationalization process in developing countries in detailed comparison with other entry strategies is not enough discussed in academic literature. This work is aimed to fill this gap and is focused on the research of the oil and gas companies in the developing countries and the identification of the reasons why companies should change their strategies to joint venture in the process of internationalization. This topic is highly relevant, because many international oil and gas companies tend to expand their operations abroad for the long-term opportunities, the choice of the right internationalization strategy is crucial for them. With the help of the analysis companies can examine if their case is right for choosing IJV or it is better for them to select another internationalization strategy.

The object of this work is: the process of internationalization. The subject focuses on: the process of internationalization of oil and gas companies. The goal of the research is to identify the reasons why oil and gas companies choose international joint venture over other strategies during the process of internationalization in developing countries. The research question is: what are the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by oil and gas companies in developing countries?

In the work is used qualitative research in particular analysis of the previous literature on the topic and related materials, case studies analysis. Quantitative research used in this work is the analysis of statistics and databases.

In the first chapter is indicated the previous research on the process of internationalization strategies: their advantages, disadvantages and the reasons to choose in the process of internationalization on particular steps. Then the process of internationalization of oil and gas companies is analyzed, its peculiarities and the reasons to choose each of the strategies. 

The second chapter starts with the oil and gas market overview, main trends and tendencies. Moreover, the second chapter contains industry analysis, which includes the research of 60 cases of companies choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization and the reasons for that. Further research is focused on the case studies of Shell and Chevron internationalization to Nigeria and Venezuela. The reasons of their choice of joint venture as an internationalization strategy is observed and analyzed. 

In the third chapter are discussed accumulated research findings and the recommendations for oil and gas companies in choosing strategy in the process of internationalization. Moreover, limitations of this work and the recommendations for further research on the topic are considered.
Chapter 1. Theoretical aspects of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by oil and gas companies in developing countries

1.1 Theoretical aspects of the process of internationalization
Any company goes through several stages of development in its lifetime, starting from the startup stage and ending with death or rebirth. It is so called firm’s lifecycle during which the company inevitably faces the idea of entering new markets, internationalization. “Internationalization is the process of adapting exchange transaction modality to international markets” (Calof and Beamish 1995). Two directions of internationalization were distinguished by Johanson and Vahlne (1977): increasing involvement of the firm in the individual foreign country and successive establishment of operations in new countries. Internationalization in fact is the process of transferring a product or technology between borders and there are certain reasons for this process to start. If the company starts looking abroad during the growth stage of development, the motivations for it are “active”, such as profit increase, technological advantage, tax benefits, managerial commitment etc. If the situation is opposite and a company starts internationalization process during the decline stage, the reasons for that are “reactive”: competitive pressure, excess capacity, declining domestic sales or saturated domestic markets (Moreira, Navaia and Ribau 2022). 
International company is “a company which is actively involved in economic pursuits in several different foreign markets, and which has, as a result of these interests, a significant percentage of the market in those areas” (Kresser 1971).
Internationalization strategies are often referred to as market entry strategies (modes), and in some of the literature on the topic, these concepts are interchangeable. Market entry strategy is “an institutional arrangement that makes possible the entry of a company’s products, technology, human skills, management or other resources into a foreign country” (Schellenberg et. al. 2018). The strategies are exporting, contractual agreements (franchising and licensing), joint ventures and foreign direct investment (FDI) (greenfield investments, mergers and acquisitions) (Malhotra, Agarwal and Ulgado, 2003). 

Vernon (1966) focuses on 3 stages of production development: new product, maturing product and standardized product. On the new product stage, a company enters a foreign market with the exporting strategy, having production units in the home country. However, at the maturing stage due to the number of reasons the status quo of the company in the local market may be threatened. The threats are correlated with the competition on the local market: local firms understand that they lose their positions, local governments are concerned with the situation and start to find ways to replace imports. In order to avoid the threat, the first investment is initiated by host companies to protect their business and local production facilities are being established. 
One of the criticisms of IPLC theory was in the fact, that it does not take into account different types of exporting and joint venture strategies (Sharma and Erramilli 2004). For this reason, Johansson (2005) introduced the entry mode matrix, in which each stage of IPLC is correlated with concrete strategy. The first stage with indirect exporting, maturity step is correlated with direct exporting. High control modes are most suitable in cases where firms require the ability to maintain strict oversight and influence over their associated entities.
Another theory called Uppsala model was developed by Johanson and Vahlne (1977). Authors use two important aspects of the internationalization process: market commitment and knowledge about foreign markets. Market commitment in its turn consists of two elements: the number of resources committed and the degree of commitment. Commitment decisions are mostly based on knowledge: opportunities and problems; possible alternatives. Experiential knowledge allows to see concrete opportunities. The more knowledge a company has about particular market, the more valuable are the resources, the stronger is the commitment.
All these theories assume that foreign companies choose export as the first stage of entering the market. However, this is not always the case. As it is argued by Agndal (2004), firms changing their strategy during internationalization process can follow not only the way of increasing commitment with the change of strategy, as it was discussed by previous theories, but also in a way of decreasing or remaining on the same level of market commitment. At the same time companies can use multiple types of strategies in the host markets (Petersen and Welch 2002). 
Agndal’s (2004) theory considering entry mode change is stated on several conclusions. First of all, high commitment modes are usually implemented following low commitment modes. However, the case of changing to the lower commitment level also takes place sometimes, when the use of multiple modes is generally avoided. Secondly, decrease of commitment levels in selecting modes becomes evident when a previously employed high commitment strategy fails to produce the anticipated results or when the initial reasons for its use are no longer applicable. And the last but not least, changes related to a single market, or a few markets usually have a reactive nature and demonstrate emergent properties. A more intentional method in selecting modes suggests a more cautious approach to ensure the appropriate mode is chosen for each market, rather than relying on higher commitment modes.
In order to understand the possible reasons why international companies choose one or another internationalization strategy it is worth to consider each of them in detail. 




Figure 1
Internationalization strategies of international companies







Complied by the authors from the data from Malhotra, Agarwal, Ulgado (2003); Schellenberg et. al. (2018); Buckley, Casson (1998)

On the figure 1 are visualized internationalization strategies, which are used by international companies. 

Exporting can be identified as selling goods from one country to another. This form of market entry helps to avoid manufacturing in the foreign country, reduces risks of operations and helps to learn more about foreign market for any future steps (Buckley and Casson 1998). Exporting is often used as a first strategy to enter the market and get acquainted with the situation with the minimum costs and risks. Exporting can be direct or indirect. Direct one is more “involved” way as it uses the local intermediaries for operations, the cost of it is obviously higher than the indirect one, but it gives company more benefits: provides the control over distribution channels, increases sales and profits (Zhaoxian 2001). 

Another form of market entry is contractual agreement. Licensing is a legal agreement between two parties, where one of them grants another the right to use intellectual property. The property generally includes patents, technologies, trademarks (Kotler and Armstrong 2012). Licensing is not influenced much by economic and political changes, has a low risk and cost (Agarwal and Ramaswami 1992). Franchising is a strategy in which business owner pays to franchiser to use his branding, trademark (Kotler and Armstrong 2012). Among benefits of franchising are: brand recognition, easier sells and lower risks, easier start of business. However, there are also disadvantages, such as high cost; great dependency of franchisees from franchisors and the lack of control of the business (Salar and Salar 2014).  

Foreign direct investment (FDI) refers to a company's investment in a foreign business. This investment can take the form of acquiring a long-term stake in the company or expanding operations overseas. The forms of FDI are greenfield investments and mergers and acquisitions (CFI 2023). The most popular forms of foreign direct investment are greenfield investments and mergers and acquisitions (M&A). There are different forms of FDI: horizontal (the same type of production), vertical (the production of raw material abroad) and conglomerate (two different products at home and abroad) (Caves 1971).

Among other strategies, companies often prefer joint ventures and there is a number of rational reasons for this. Joint venture (JV) is “an enterprise in which two or more investors share ownership and control over property rights and operation” (Carter 1997). In international joint ventures two parties which sign the agreement are from different states. In some cases, IJV is formed for the specific project or goal which two companies involved expect to reach together through cooperation. Other IJVs may imply cooperation on the longer term but still constant decades-long cooperation is not expected. So, the death of joint venture in some cases does not mean its failure, but the fulfillment of the task after which the continuation of the IJV’s work becomes irrelevant (Stewart and Maughn 2011).

International joint ventures can be formed as a contractual arrangement or equity joint venture. The first form implies a written agreement which is the basis of cooperation, mostly for only one project. The second variant is an entity owned by two companies in certain proportions. Equity joint venture is more often used for long-term cooperation based on large investments (Stewart and Maughn 2011). 

A company which operates in the foreign market can face restrictions from the local government, which force it to apply joint venture strategy (Gullander 1976). However, in many cases companies choose joint ventures not because all other ways are prohibited, but because this entry mode seems more beneficial to them and opens up new opportunities. International joint ventures provide various benefits for both sides of the agreement. Partners share both risks and benefits of the project. Comparing to other internationalization strategies, IJVs allow to operate in the foreign market in a more efficient way. Moreover, cooperation with local partner gives an access to its knowledge and technologies, which can be critically important conducting business in the host market. The local partner has all the essential connections with suppliers and customers (Stewart and Maughn 2011). 

Agarwal and Ramaswami (1992) made the research on the basis of three factors which can influence the strategy decision on the host market: location (meaning the market risk and potential opportunities), internalization advantages and firm’s ownership (size, international experience etc.). Authors assert that the majority of companies use investment only in high potential markets. Moreover, they found that small companies with not broad international experience prefer to establish joint ventures in order to reduce risks of entry sharing them with the local partner. 

Yu and Tang (1992) allege that the form of international joint venture is mostly useful in case the company that enters the foreign market has the strong competitor there and the risk of failure is too high. Moreover, IJVs are to be chosen in case the significant reduction of cost of running the business between the foreign corporation and the local firm is predicted. 

Hennart (1991) proposes the theory of transaction costs, by which he explains the reasons for international joint ventures formation. There are two main reasons to form IJVs according to the author. First of all, both parties' markets for intermediate commodities like know-how, components and raw materials are crumbling. Second, getting ownership rights to the assets producing these intermediary commodities through a joint venture arrangement is less expensive than purchasing or duplicating those assets (Janakiramanan and Asjeet 2004).

At the same time some scholars point out, that international joint ventures are unstable. Porter (1990) asserted that IJVs do not help to produce the competitive advantage of the firm on the foreign market as they are too costly to operate. Bleeke and Erns (1991) have found that 24 out of 49 international alliances did not satisfy the expectations of one or both parties involved (Inkpen and Beamish 1997).

However, despite potential instability and internal disputes between the parties involved, international joint ventures remain a favored strategy for international companies, particularly in complex and large-scale projects within industries such as oil and gas.
 









1.2 Existing research on the process of internationalization of oil and gas companies

More than a half of world’s primary energy needs are provided by the oil and gas industry. The feature of the oil and gas industry is that choosing the target country, firms should consider in the first place the availability of resources and only than any other conditions (Reddy and Xie 2017).

There are 3 main segments of the oil and gas industry: upstream (exploration & production), midstream (transport & storage) and downstream (reﬁning & distribution). The oil and gas extraction is divided on 2 main sectors: offshore (in the open sea), onshore (on the land). The upstream sector focuses on exploration, extraction, and separation of oil and gas. The process is highly risky, capital-intensive and demands a long time. In the midstream sector companies are involved into the transportation and storage (shipping, pipeline fleets, trucking, and storing). The key features of this segment are: high regulation and low capital risk. The downstream segment consists of processing, marketing, and selling refined products (Khan 2020). 

There is a great number of obstacles, which can postpone or even end the realization of project. It is a complex system in which any mistake can be fatal. So, the knowledge of the region plays crucial role in the completion of oil and gas companies’ plans. Country specifics play a significant role in the choice of internationalization strategy. Among other influence factors are: taxation, the economic, political, and regulatory regime, investment risks and trust relations with counterparties in another country (Novais and João 2016). 

Oil and gas companies use different internationalization strategies on the foreign markets. Among them are exporting, foreign direct investment (FDI) (greenfield investments, mergers and acquisitions) and joint ventures (Figure 2). 


Figure 2
Internationalization strategies of oil and gas companies







Complied by the authors from the data from Zhaoxian (2001); Young, Moffat (2012); Bradley (2005)

It happens that companies have to change their strategy in a process of internationalization for a number of reasons. Sometimes this is due to changes in the host government laws (industry nationalization), sometimes it is correlated with the benefits of the new strategy chosen (Stewart and Maughn 2011).

The nationalization occurs when the government assumes control over a company or industry, typically without compensating for the loss of the seized assets' net worth and potential income. This action may be driven by a nation's effort to consolidate power, diminish foreign ownership of industries crucial to local economies, or support struggling sectors (Cossa and Mondlane et.al. 2019). 

Nationalization may allow foreign companies to participate in joint ventures with state-owned companies where the state oversees the industry but permits private companies to engage in resource extraction and maintain a portion of the profits (Cossa and Mondlane et. al. 2019). A state-owned enterprise (SOE), is typically defined as a company that is owned either directly by the government or indirectly through government-held shares in the company. In the oil and gas sector, state-owned national oil companies (NOCs) persist in establishing predominant roles within the majority of oil-producing nations (Orazgaliyev 2019).

However, nationalization of industry is just one of possible scenarios which can influence the change and choice of internationalization strategy (Stewart and Maughn 2011). It is important to research the particular reasons, why companies choose each strategy in the process of internationalization. 

Exporting is widely chosen by oil and gas companies entering foreign markets, in the first step of internationalization, to test the ground in a new market. This strategy allows firms to have the smallest commitment to the new market, helps to reduce costs and risks of entry, especially for smaller companies. Big players, which have a great number of resources can afford strategies with larger involvement into the foreign market, but still sometimes use exporting to get market knowledge (Bradley 2005). 

However, despite some clear advantages of exporting for oil and gas companies, it has many disadvantages. Exporting means no internal participation for companies in the foreign market, firms do not control the operations fully, they can miss a lot of business opportunities. When companies start to feel more confident in the foreign market and see long-term opportunities, they change strategy to the one with higher market commitment (joint venture or FDI) (Zhaoxian 2001).

International joint ventures provide full involvement in the operations on the foreign market, allow great control and reduce risk of “oversight”. However, it also depends on the size of the company, its intent and the stage of internationalization. If a firm is small or just want to try some not costly way of entry without great involvement, it is more likely to choose exporting (Bradley 2005). Large companies prefer to utilize an IJV entry mode because they believe that local markets differ greatly in terms of competitive situations, operating conditions, social, economic and political systems. IJV is more appropriate as it gives the organization more adaptability to meet the needs of various competitive environments (Nanu 2010). 

FDI is another possible internationalization strategy. FDI in the form of wholly-owned venture is the riskiest strategy for oil and gas companies. It demands the great number of resources from the start. The company also can make merger or acquisition of the existing company. Companies which choose this strategy can have the highest profits and the greatest degree of control (Zhaoxian 2001). 

However, there are usually a lot of restrictions imposed on the wholly-owned ventures of the foreign companies. The major obstacles, which can be associated with the difficult and massive oil and gas projects are extensive capital costs and high risks (Young and Moffat 2012). Wholly owned ventures are both cost- and risk-intensive (Zhaoxian 2001). Big players sometimes can afford such strategy from the start, however, more often companies chose it during the internationalization process, when they are better acquainted with the market and ready to increase commitment (Johanson and Vahlne 1977).

Oil and gas companies often choose international joint ventures operating on foreign markets in order to diversify risks associated with an oilfield venture across multiple projects, allowing each partner to participate in a greater number of individual ventures (Stevens 1972). Local partner has consistent knowledge of the market and can share it with the foreign one. For oil and gas industry it is particularly important, because any deal is correlated with high capital expenditures (Almohsen 2015). As for Jelinek and Pettit (2012), IJV is a preferable strategy of host market operations compared to mergers and acquisitions. 

Oil and gas companies engaging in international joint ventures collaborate by pooling their capital, expertise, technology, and distribution networks with a local partner. In return, they gain access to the local partner's market presence, established supplier base, local facilities, and political expertise (Young and Moffat 2012).

Share of the financial contribution for the project is another major benefit of the JV formation, because sometimes the projects are so big and expensive, that one company cannot afford to implement them alone (Nanu 2010). Companies use IJV to develop a field or, if it is already developed, to collectively exploit it as a unit rather than through individual leases. This approach aims to reduce costs and enhance extraction efficiency, ultimately benefiting all participants involved. Companies can use joint ventures in order to prevent unnecessary expenditure in establishing downstream facilities like crude oil pipelines, tanker loading stations, refineries, product storage, and distribution facilities (Stevens 1972). 

It is widely believed that companies prefer to operate on distant markets by means of joint ventures because of the difficulties with the transfer of managerial techniques (Goodnow and Hansz 1972) and market knowledge (Yavaş, Eroğlu and Eroğlu 1994). Socio-cultural differences can also be significant problem for companies which entered a new market, local partner can help overcome the barrier. However, these socio-cultural reasons are less relevant when a company has its own firm-specific benefits: multinational structure, size of the company (Agarwal and Ramaswami 1992), capital intensity (Erramilli and Rao 1993). Having these and other internal benefits a company may suggest not to form the joint venture with another firm, because the management feels that they can succeed alone.

International joint ventures are highly popular in the emerging markets. For instance, 70% of the oil and gas production in Africa is from JVs or partnering agreements between national and international companies (Mawanda 2022). Beamish (1986) identifies the reasons of international joint venture formation in developing countries. His main conclusion is that 57% of JVs in developing countries from his sample are formed because of the insistence of the government and other percent of ventures are created on the basis of mutual need of two parties of technologies and skills to perform projects. 

The argument by Tong, Reuer and Peng (2008) is that particularly in emerging economies, IJVs offer beneficial growth opportunities for foreign firms. In obedience to the Khanna and Palepu (1997) argument, the major difference between developing and developed states in terms of market entry opportunities is in marketing-support institutions. In emerging economies such institutions work not as proper as in developed economies. This fact raises uncertainties in supply and demand conditions, government policies and property rights (Peng 2000). 

Overall, international joint venture is a good choice for an oil and gas company in a developing country. First of all, cooperation between foreign and local partner can bring significant risk reduction. Moreover, companies can share expenditures, technologies and skills, what is particularly important for capital- and research-intensive oil and gas industry. Cooperation between two big players can bring the leading position on the competitive foreign market. Local partner knows the system far better than foreign one, so can help to avoid problems associated with legal or political regulations, it also can provide the foreign partner through socio-cultural features of the state. 








1.3 Existing research on the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by oil and gas companies in developing countries

In certain nations, the primary revenue comes from the oil and gas sector. Nevertheless, these projects consistently entail significant risks due to uncertainties regarding the precise volumes of oil and gas in particular locations, as well as the costs associated with project execution. Oil and gas projects are also influenced by external events: economic, political, environmental, that can cause the great price volatility (Dudnik 2020). Therefore, companies which conduct such projects are expected to be highly cautious with the internationalization strategy they choose. 

Oil and gas industry in fact is a good field for investment, where companies can get great results by means of FDI. However, any investment is also accompanied by high risks, which not many companies are able to take (Pettit 2011). So joint ventures may be a more reliable solution to reduce the risks of operations in a foreign market. 

Gullander (1976) concluded, that in many countries the restrictions imposed on foreign companies are so strict, that the choice of joint venture becomes the only way to operate on the market without long-standing difficulties. However, many companies choose this entry mode even in those regions where they can operate without local partner, because it brings benefits (Stewart and Maughn 2011). 

Choosing joint venture at a certain stage of internationalization is correlated with particular reasons, so as change of FDI or exporting strategy to IJV.

First of all, what is particularly important for the oil and gas industry, when two companies combine their international expertise, they can predict possible obstacles during project implementation and correctly assess the risks. When a foreign company does this on its own, it may make a mistake, since it does not have a thorough knowledge of the area and experience in implementing projects on this territory (Anderson 2023). Сorporations can spread risk among various capital providers by using IJVs rather than FDI, and such advantages have long been identified as a key driver for IJV formation in capital- and research-intensive industries such as oil and gas (Tong, Reuer and Peng 2008). Especially, when companies enter difficult and long-lasting projects, which demand large capital injections, they can change strategy from FDI to IJV. Moreover, companies share their capital, technologies and resources to launch projects, which may give an opportunity to reduce costs (Stewart and Maughn 2011).

Collaboration with the local partner can reduce risks associated with the government as local partners have relationships and agreements with authorities (Gomes-Casseres 1996). Janakiramanan and Asjeet (2004) argue that the companies prefer international joint ventures in the politically high-risk countries. Therefore, if the political situation in the country becomes more turbulent, companies can abandon the FDI strategy and switch to a joint venture.

Nanu (2010) states that in IJV the partner can remove any political or cultural impediments that might have existed during an acquisition or the creation of a wholly owned subsidiary, as well as give the crucial knowledge and network access. International joint ventures give greater opportunities on the foreign market because when two companies come together their share on the market becomes more visible and they become more competitive.

Dzaka-Kikouta (2020) conducted a study in which he identified the reasons for Chinese oil and gas companies among companies from other sectors to choose joint venture in their internationalization process. The author accumulated and studied surveys by other scholars and statistics of the FDI and joint venture formation by Chinese companies in the African region since 2000s. As it was identified, joint ventures were one of the most commonly used strategy during the internationalization process. Chinese companies used joint ventures as a strategy to secure oil and mining supplies. Chinese companies often take a majority stake at the enterprise, using wider control opportunities, taking into account the weak technological and managerial skills of the local partners. 

Cui and Jiang (2009) conducted a survey, in which they identified the major reasons for multinational corporations (MNCs) to choose FDI or joint venture in the process of internationalization in developing countries. They used the sample of 588 Chinese firms, which used FDI and JV strategies. From the 138 usable samples they identified that the major reason for firms to choose wholly-owned subsidiary in the process of internationalization is that the foreign market is highly competitive, and the firm needs a more significant and stable position in it. With regard to joint ventures, the major reason is that the growth prospects on the market are really high and a company wants to create competitive advantage. Moreover, companies enter into joint ventures when they face a cultural barrier or regulative institutional barriers, which local partner can help to overcome taking into account its consistent knowledge of the market. So, if the company wants to create competitive advantage or see cultural conflicts, it can change strategy to IJV during its internationalization. 

James (2011) in his study of NOCs and IOCs (international oil companies) focuses on the reasons, why it is profitable for both to cooperate and create joint ventures. As it is identified by the author, the primary advantage of forming JV is that it provides IOCs with the opportunity to access reserves in locations where their technology and resources are highly valued, enhancing profitability and production in complex and large projects. Moreover, it allows IOCs to test innovative technologies in a lower-risk environment. In addition, joint ventures significantly reduce political risks, since both companies, as well as the government of the country, are interested in a positive result of work. So, if a company faces problems with local regulations during the internationalization process it can be better to enter joint venture to get more opportunities for effective production. 

Odediran and Windapo (2016) classify risks, which companies have during the process of internationalization to another market, in two categories: country related (political, economic, social) and project related. His major focus is political risks associated with uncertainties of foreign company about the local regime. The study explores, among various hypotheses, whether the perception of political risks influences the internationalization strategy decisions of multinational construction firms in the African market and identifies which mode of entry is considered less politically risky. In the study was used mixed method of data analysis. Researchers identified 14 political risks and 10 entry modes in their analysis. The research was done on South African construction firms that are listed on cibd Register of Contractors Grades 8 and 9 (largest construction companies). Respondents of companies with oversees experience were asked questions in the 3 sections: general background of the company (oversees experience, revenue, assets, etc.), regularity of running across every category of risks found through literature research internationalization strategies used to access African market and their effectiveness in risk mitigation. Researches created a sample of 231 active construction companies, 76% of companies responded (32.9%). The analysis confirmed that the perception of risks influences the internationalization strategy choice and joint venture is chosen by the majority of companies in order to mitigate risks. The construction industry is complex enough to be compared with oil and gas and the risks obtained during the projects are also significant. So, it was decided to include the work by Odediran and Windapo in the research.


Figure 3 
Reasons to choose IJV in the process of internationalization


         Internationalization process                 Internationalization process                 Internationalization process
IJV                                             Exporting    IJV                        FDI                IJV

















Complied by the authors from the data from Zhaoxian (2001); Young, Moffat (2012); Bradley (2005); Cossa, Mondlane et. Al. (2019); Nanu (2010); Stevens (1972); Beamish (1985); Dzaka-Kikouta (2020); Cui and Jiang (2009); James (2011)  

There was much research done on the topic of the reasons to choose international joint venture among other internationalization strategies. The reasons to choose IJV on each step of internationalization: entry strategy, after exporting, after FDI are highlighted in the figure 3. 
Chapter 2. Analysis of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by Chevron and Shell in Nigeria and Venezuela

Overview of oil and gas industry and market analysis

Petroleum and natural gas stand as the primary global energy sources, with crude oil supplying 45% and natural gas contributing 25% to fulfill the world's energy needs (Vasudevan, Zolghadri and Makarem 2023). 

Following three volatile years, during which the global oil markets were significantly disrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic and political conflicts, there has been a gradual readjustment. Crude oil prices, which had risen due to these events, are now lower than pre-conflict levels, and there has been a decline in refined product cracks, which were previously at their peak. This decline is a result of increased supplies and a slowdown in oil demand growth in developed countries (IEA 2023).

The worldwide oil and gas market expanded from $6,989.65 billion in 2022 to $7,330.80 billion in 2023, registering a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 4.9% (The Business Research Company 2023). 









Graph 1
Largest oil and gas companies by market cap.

Compiled by the authors from the data from research study Companies Market Cap (2024)
The leading companies in oil and gas market by market capitalization are: Saudi Aramco, Exxon Mobil, Chevron, Shell, PetroChina, TotalEnergies, Conoco Phillips, BP plc, Petrobras, TAQA (Companies Market Cap 2024) (Graph 1).

International energy agency expects the growth rate of global oil demand to decrease significantly during the forecast period of 2022-2028 as the transition to alternative energy sources progresses. Oil demand is projected to reach 105.7 mb/d by 2028, representing an increase of 5.9 mb/d in comparison to the levels observed in 2022 (IEA 2023).











Graph 2
Annual oil demand growth, 2022-2028

Compiled by the authors from the data from the report IEA(2023)

Between 2022 and 2028 the largest increase in oil demand is expected to happen in the Asia Pacific region, reaching 5.5 mb/d between 2022-2028. Other regions such as Africa, Eurasia, the Middle East, and Latin America will also experience strong growth in oil demand, with a combined increase of 1.9 mb/d compared to 2022 levels. In contrast, North American demand will plateau in 2023 and subsequently decline by 240 kb/d per year on average until 2028. European oil demand, on the other hand, will be supported by an increase in jet fuel consumption until 2024 but will then decline by an average of 120 kb/d annually (IEA 2023) (Graph 2).






Graph 3
Global oil supply capacity forecast, year-on-year change, 2022-2028

Compiled by the authors from the data from the report International Energy Agency (2023).

Non-OPEC+ countries, particularly the United States, Brazil, and Guyana, are set to dominate the medium-term capacity expansion plans in the oil production industry. Within the OPEC+ alliance, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and Iraq lead the efforts in capacity building. African and Asian members face challenges with ongoing production declines, and Russian production is affected by sanctions, resulting in a decrease (IEA 2023) (Graph 3).

The worldwide utilization of natural gas has been rising at an average annual rate of nearly 2% since 2011; however, the growth is expected to decelerate in the coming years to below 0.4% annually until 2030 (IEA 2023).







Graph 4
Evolution of the place of oil and gas in the world energy supply

Compiled by the authors from the data from research study IEA (2023).

The data on the graph 4 shows the dynamics of the growth of renewables in comparison with other energy sources, such as oil and gas, which in turn are losing their positions in the supply side (IEA 2023). 

All in all, major trends in oil and gas industry in 2023 and the forecasted 5 years are volatility of oil and prices, the decrease in oil and gas demand because of the development of renewable energy sources usage. 

Since the year 2020, over 750 joint ventures (JVs) have been established by oil and gas (O&G) companies, with an increasing focus on the clean energy sector. This trend is setting a robust groundwork for potential mergers and acquisitions (M&A) in the coming years (Deloitte 2023).

In the frame of research, authors conducted the study of the reasons, why international oil and gas companies choose joint venture in developing countries during the internationalization process using a sample of 45 cases of IJV formation. Moreover, the analysis of the companies, which entered the developing countries with exporting or FDI strategy and then because of some reasons changed it to joint venture (15 cases). 
Graph 5
Reasons to choose joint venture in the internationalization process by oil and gas companies

The first analysis with the 45 cases of companies choosing IJV strategy (Graph 5) showed, that the major reasons for that are expansion of operations (24%); growth strategy of the company (15%); restrictions imposed on foreign companies working in a country alone (14%); that partners share skills, labor and technologies (14%) and the competitive advantage which company can get working with a local partner (13%). See the full table with the case studies in the Appendix (1).








Graph 6
Reasons to change FDI/Exporting to the joint venture in the internationalization process by oil and gas companies 

The second analysis of the reasons to change exporting or FDI strategy to joint venture (15 cases, Graph 6) showed that the majority of companies change their market entry strategy to joint venture in order to get new opportunities in the expansion of operations (32%), higher profits (16%) and the support of government (11%). 

The reasons like the possibility to share skills, technologies and labor (9%); less costs (capital investments) (9%) and the restrictions on foreign companies working alone (9%) were also mentioned in many cases. See the full table with the case studies in the Appendix (2).

As Nigeria and Venezuela are the countries, researched in case studies it is worth to make the oil and gas market overview in these countries.

In 2022, Nigeria marked an average daily oil production of 1.49 million barrels per day (mbpd), which made up 6.63% of its total GDP. Nigeria ranks as one of the leading global exporters of liquefied natural gas (LNG), being among the top five countries in this respect (International Trade Administration 2024). 

Nigeria plays a crucial role in Africa's oil and gas industry due to its abundant natural gas reserves, favorable location, large consumer market, and long-lasting crude oil production history. Nevertheless, a range of external factors, including the pandemic, economic instability, exchange rate fluctuations, volatile global oil prices, and internal challenges such as regulatory uncertainties, crude oil theft, pipeline vandalism, inadequate infrastructure, and administrative difficulties, have contributed to a decline in production, constrained export capacity, and diminished investments and returns within the industry (Adebowale, Iwuozo and Udo-Okon 2023). Insurgents active in the Niger Delta escalated assaults on oil fields and terminals throughout 2016, resulting in a decline in production to a low of 1.4 million barrels per day (S&P Global 2021).

Graph 7  
Nigeria crude oil production

Compiled by the authors from the data from the statistics Trading Economics (2024)

However, the capacity of African refineries is scheduled to experience its most significant increase since the 1980s as Nigeria is getting ready to inaugurate the Lekki refinery, which has a capacity of 650 kb/d. It is anticipated that the refinery will be fully operational by mid-2024 (IEA 2023).

Major players on Nigerian market are Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC); Chevron Corporation; Exxon Mobil Corporation; TotalEnergies SE; Shell Plc (Mordor Intelligence 2024).

Venezuela has the largest oil reserves in the world. According to the Venezuelan government, these reserves are estimated to be 297.5 billion barrels. Approximately 87% of these reserves, consist of Orinoco Oil Belt extra-heavy crude oil. In terms of natural gas reserves, Venezuela has seen an increase to 195.28 trillion cubic feet (TCF), placing them at the eighth position in the list of countries with the largest natural gas reserves. The majority of these reserves, about 82%, are associated gas, while the remaining 18% is non-associated gas primarily found offshore, both to the east and west of the country (Delgado, Corban and Miele 2023).

For several decades, Venezuela held a prominent position as one of the world's major oil suppliers and was among the founding members of OPEC. However, since 2002, the country has grappled with a political and economic crisis that has significantly impacted its oil industry. Various governmental measures have restricted the activities of both foreign and domestic investors, granting the government increased control over the oil sector. This has led to a deterioration in the maintenance of oil facilities and the departure of crucial personnel across all levels of the industry. Additionally, the US Government and certain European countries have imposed sanctions on the Venezuelan government and its state-owned entities in the economic sector, including PDVSA and its subsidiaries. Despite boasting some of the largest oil reserves globally, Venezuela's reserves primarily consist of extra-heavy crude oil. To make this oil marketable, it requires enhancements through additives or imports of light crude (Rivero, García-Soto and Ramírez 2023). 

Graph 8
Venezuela crude oil production

Compiled by the authors from the data from the statistics Trading Economics (2024).

In the recent years, Venezuela has overcome a prolonged decline as its crude oil production witnessed a consecutive increase for the second year in a row, reaching 700 kb/d in 2022, which is a growth of 90 kb/d compared to the previous year (EIA 2023). In light of an agreement between the Venezuelan government and opposition parties for the 2024 election, the US administration significantly loosened sanctions on Venezuela's oil industry in October 2023 (Spetalnick and Parraga 2023).
Major players on Venezuelan market are Petróleos de Venezuela S.A; Chevron Corporation; Total SA; NK Rosneft PAO; Repsol SA; Shell (Mordor Intelligence 2024).






2.2 Case study of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by Chevron in Nigeria and Venezuela

Chevron was one of the leading oil and gas companies in the world, at the time period from 1940s to 1970s it was one of the so called Seven Sisters, companies which dominated petroleum industry (Pereira 2023). The analysis of the financial situation of Chevron at the time showed, that sales revenue of the company rapidly increased in the period from 1975 to 1980, such growth can be associated, among other things, with the formation of joint ventures, including IJVs in Nigeria and Venezuela and the implementation of new projects associated with the joint ventures. 
Graph 9
Sales revenue of Chevron 1970-1990

Complied by the authors from the data from Grant, Cibin (1996)

This conclusion also confirms the amount of investment in the oil and gas business, which sharply increased during the period from 1974 to 1982.





Graph 10 
Average annual capital expenditure of Chevron in oil and gas business 1970-1990

Complied by the authors from the data from Grant, Cibin (1996)

In Nigeria, the enduring authority and ownership of mineral resources, specifically oil and gas, within its geographical boundaries are granted to the Federal Government of Nigeria. The Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) serves as the representative of the federal government for engaging in commercial endeavors within the oil and gas sector (Resolution Law Firm 2024). 

Chevron initiated its operations in Nigeria in 1913, marketing the Texaco products to the Nigerian market. In 1961 the joint operation of Texaco and Standard Oil Company of California (later Chevron) begun. In 1970 the production was shared with Nigerian National Oil Corporation (60%) and 20/20 for other participants. In 1977 the oil and gas industry was nationalized and the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) was created as a merger of the Nigerian National Oil Corporation and the Federal Ministry of Petroleum and Energy Resources. The joint venture between NNPC (60%) and Chevron (40%) was created (Chevron 2024).

Chevron is Nigeria’s 3rd-largest oil producer and one of the country’s major investors, channeling substantial annual capital investments amounting to billions (Chevron 2017). 

Its operations in Nigeria involve a joint-venture partnership with the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC), covering both onshore and offshore assets situated in the Niger Delta region. Chevron, through its main subsidiary in Nigeria, Chevron Nigeria Limited (CNL), manages and possesses a 40 percent stake in eight concessions located in the onshore and near-onshore areas of the Niger Delta. Furthermore, Chevron has substantial involvement in multi-partner deepwater initiatives. It oversees the Agbami Field, a substantial deepwater discovery in Nigeria, and hold a non-operational stake in the Usan Field (Chevron 2023). 

There are several reasons for Chevron to choose joint venture with the local partner as the internationalization strategy in Nigeria.

First of all, Nigeria has an abundant oil and gas reserves. It is estimated to hold approximately 193 (Tscf) of proven natural gas reserves, making it Africa's largest and the world's tenth largest holder of gas reserves. In terms of oil reserves, Nigeria boasts proven reserves of around 37.0 billion barrels, ranking it as the second largest in Africa and the tenth largest globally (Savannah Energy 2023). So, the opportunities of the region are abundant with the massive scope of work. One of the reasons why Chevron is involved in operations together with the NNPC is that the resources needed for such work are huge, so as capital investments. Local partner can provide additional help, share costs, give more human and capital resources. It is needed to speed up the production and make it more efficient. Moreover, Nigeria has a great potential of opening new fields. This needs constant research procedures and seismic acquisitions to investigate deeper resource deposits. Chevron needs to accumulate resources with other companies and share costs in order to open new deeper opportunities on the existing territories and investigate new fields (Chevron 2017).

The risks of operations in Nigeria are high because of the continuous crime directed to oil and gas operations. There is a critical oil theft in the country, which sometimes lead to disastrous ecological consequences. Moreover, the cases of kidnapping and attacks on workers are widespread. The companies operating in Nigeria have to spend more on the protection of employees and facilities. Chevron actively works with NNPC and the government to prevent security threats and ensure safe operation of enterprises (S&P Global 2021). 

Partnership with the local company in case of Chevron in Nigeria is beneficial, as it helps the company to promote its social initiatives in the country together with its partner NNPC and with governmental support. Chevron’s strategy revolves around elevating the income and employment opportunities for local residents, thereby fostering more stable and prosperous communities that can improve economic gains. By promoting social stability and prosperity, Chevron aims to mitigate operational risks and enhance the company’s overall business performance. Moreover, such initiatives help to reduce oil theft and increase the safety of production. These measures would be difficult to implement without the support of NNPC (Kaplan 2018). 

Comparing to FDI, joint venture produces more benefits, as it helps to overcome restrictions imposed on oil and gas companies in the region after nationalization and to get government support. Besides, the cost of production becomes less, so the partners can make business more profitable. In case of wholly-owned subsidiary, for instance, all costs would be on the Chevron’s side. In IJV Chevron works closely with NNPC and the government and can be more flexible in its socio-cultural approach. Moreover, operations in Nigeria are difficult because of constant criminal activities and oil theft, working as a wholly-owned subsidiary is more complicated, when joint venture with NNPC gives Chevron increased government support, protection and help with the business safety insurance.

Exporting strategy is less profitable and does not imply full-scaled operations in the country. Moreover, in order to implement its social and political initiatives in the country, Chevron needs to have an increased market commitment.

Figure 4 
Reasons to choose internationalization strategy for Chevron in Nigeria
Internationalization process             

1913                                         1961             1977
Exporting                                  FDI              IJV








Compiled by the authors from the data from the data from Chevron, 2017; Savannah Energy (2023); S&P Global (2021); Kaplan (2018); Rapier (2019); Ruano (2023).

Figure 4 shows the process of internationalization of Chevron in Nigeria and the particular reasons for it to change strategies during the process.

Another country of Chevron’s operations discussed in this work will be Venezuela. Chevron takes a leading position among private oil companies in Venezuela, initially started operating in the country in 1923 by carrying out exploration activities as Venezuelan Gulf Oil Company. In 1946, a significant discovery with the Boscan field was made. In 1976 the state-owned company Petróleos de Venezuela (PDVSA) was established following the nationalization of Venezuela’s oil sector, PDVSA has been the predominant force in the country’s oil industry, making it the world’s fifth-largest oil exporter. PDVSA is an oil and natural gas enterprise, engages in exploration, production, refining, and oil exports, along with the exploration and production of natural gas (PDVSA 2023). After the establishment of PDVSA, in 1976, the joint venture between the state-owned company and Chevron was formed. The companies still work in partnership, they are engaged in four onshore and offshore production projects located in Western and Eastern Venezuela (Chevron 2024). 

Venezuela has vast oil reserves; however, the magnitude of these reserves doesn’t directly correlate with revenue potential. Venezuelan oil, being heavier compared to the light crude oil typically exported by leading producers like Saudi Arabia, poses challenges. Producing, transporting, and refining heavy crude incur higher costs than their lighter counterparts. Venezuelan oil producers face the burden of elevated production expenses, as their petroleum is sold to refineries at a lower price than that of light crude. Additionally, they must cover the costs of diluents—chemical agents used to thin the heavy oil for easier transport to upgraders and refineries. Since the cost of extracting Venezuelan oil is higher than that of other regions, Chevron needed a reliable partner to share the costs (Global Americans 2023).

At the time Chevron started its operations in Venezuela, the oil boom in the country was in progress, which played a significant role in making it the most prosperous country in Latin America during that period. Venezuela was a fruitful direction for international companies (EIA 2019). After the nationalization, a lot of restrictions were imposed on private international companies in the country, so FDI strategy became hard to implement and Chevron had to change its strategy to joint venture with PDVSA, what gave it an opportunity to continue operations in the country. The contract with PDVSA gives Chevron one of the leading roles in industrial operations of the country, opening up extra opportunities for the oil and gas fields development and special projects execution (Rapier 2019). 

For Chevron the social and economic support of Venezuelan government was also a priority in order to ensure a favorable climate for the development of deposits and stable operations of the company in the country. Together with PDVSA, Chevron has conducted many social projects that have been able to improve the situation in the country and make the company’s business more efficient and secure. Chevron is working to improve the well-being of Venezuela’s communities, with a specific focus on enhancing healthcare, education, and fostering economic development. Moreover, Chevron struggled with natural disasters, which could stop or damage the operations in the country, such as flooding. All these efforts are difficult to promote, the local partner with significant influence in the region can help to organize the support and make the initiatives easier to implement (Chevron 2023).

Venezuela is politically and economically unstable country. Several political crisis have resulted in severe economic difficulties. The country is grappling with high inflation, political turmoil and significant rate of poverty as a consequence. Despite having the world’s largest confirmed oil reserves and a significant portion of its economy reliant on petroleum, resulting in it being ranked as the 25th largest oil producer globally, the regime imposes obstacles that hinder the survival of businesses. In such a complicated political and economic situation, the local partner can help to overcome major difficulties and avoid conflicts with the government (Ruano 2023).

Comparing joint venture with other possible strategies for Chevron in Venezuela, it can be identified, that exporting the same as in the case of Nigeria, is too simple strategy for the company, which wants to establish full-scaled operations in the country, get high profits and implement its initiatives in the social and political landscapes.

As for FDI, in case of Venezuela, this strategy became problematic for Chevron after the nationalization of oil and gas industry because of the wide range of restrictions imposed on private companies. Moreover, the turbulence in the political and economic situation of the country makes a joint venture much more secured for the company, as partnership with the government makes work in the country safer and more reliable. Moreover, working together with a partner allows to share the costs on labor, and technologies for the operations, which is an important argument for Venezuela, since the specifics of Venezuelan oil make the production expensive and challenging. And the last but not least, working in a joint venture gives Chevron more opportunities in the discovery of new fields, which could be prohibited for the private company working alone.

Figure 5
Reasons to choose internationalization strategy for Chevron in Venezuela
Internationalization process             

1923                                                              1976
 FDI                                                                IJV







Compiled by the authors from the data from the data from Chevron (2024); Rapier (2019); Ruano (2023); (IEA, 2023)

Figure 5 shows the process of internationalization of Chevron in Venezuela and the particular reasons for it to change strategies during the process.

Having studied the reasons why Chevron benefits from cooperation with local partners in the format of joint ventures in Nigeria and Venezuela, several common factors can be identified. First of all, it helps to overcome restrictions imposed on private companies working in the country. Secondly, the share of costs, which is important in case of countries researched. Moreover, it opens up new opportunities for Chevron, expanding the area of research. And the last but not least, the promotion of Chevron’s social and economic initiatives, which help to establish favorable operating conditions for the company’s business within the country.


























2.3 Case study of the reasons for choosing international joint venture in the process of internationalization by Shell in Nigeria and Venezuela

Shell’s financial position in 1980s improved rapidly with the growth of operations and new projects, including those, implemented in the joint ventures. Joint ventures formation in the period from 1975 to 1985 could be one of the triggers, which helped to improve overall financial situation (Grant and Cibin 1996). 

Graph 11
Sales revenue of Shell 1970-1990

Complied by the authors from the data from Grant, Cibin (1996)

Average capital expenditures of Shell in oil and gas business also indicate the increased number of projects, which were implemented at that period of time. 







Graph 12
Average annual capital expenditure of Shell in oil and gas business 1970-1990

Complied by the authors from the data from Grant, Cibin (1996)

In 1936 the Shell D’Arcy, the first Shell company in Nigeria, was founded (Shell 2024). Shell worked in the alliance with BP, in 1938 two major British companies obtained an exploration license to conduct oil prospecting activities across Nigeria (Frynas, Beck and Mellahi 2000). The joint venture of The Shell Petroleum Development Company of Nigeria (SPDC) was established in 1979, leveraging the collective assets of the former Shell-BP alliance. The Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) holds 55%, Shell owns 30%, France’s Total 10% and Italy’s Eni 5% (Reuters 2018). 

Because of the nationalization of oil and gas industry by the Nigerian government and the bunch of restrictions put on private companies operating in the country, it was more beneficial for Shell to enter the joint venture (Frynas, Beck and Mellahi 2000). However, there are also other reasons why the cooperation was advantageous for Shell.

The Chairman of Shell companies in Nigeria, Mutiu Sunmonu describes Nigeria as a “challenging operating environment”. Nigeria is a country with great level of poverty and social instability. The constant cooperation between the government and other big players on the market is needed to make the production of oil safe and to limit oil theft, which is remarkable in the country. It is the problem for the government, NNPC and all the private companies working in the country as it threatens the workers increasing the level of crime, leads to the great loss of profits and puts at risk the energy security of the country. So, it was beneficial for Shell to enter into the joint venture with NNPC in order to fight the problem together and protect facilities (Reuters 2022). Cooperation of Shell and NNPC in the SPDC joint venture allows to increase the protection of the pipelines, organize better security of oil and gas transportation and speed up the investigation of the committed crimes on the gas fields and pipelines (Shell 2022).

Entering the international joint venture with local partners strengthened the position of Shell in Nigeria and made it the leading foreign company operating in oil and gas in the country. Pooling the assets of Shell and NNPC and other companies participating in SPDC and leveraging collective political and economic influence was necessary for a joint venture to establish a dominant position in Nigeria, providing advantages that no individual participant could get independently (Resolution Law Firm 2024).

As it was stated by Shell, participation in joint ventures opens the company new market opportunities. The legal system in Nigeria is complicated, so it is far easier to operate together with the partner, who has substantial knowledge about the system and widespread connections inside the country. It makes all the legal procedures faster and less complicated (Shell 2022). 


Shell faced not only legal problems but also discontent from the local population, especially Ogoni people. There were huge conflicts between Ogoni people and Shell because of the operations in Niger Delta (Mckague 2017). The Niger Delta ecosystem has a lot of environmental problems as a result of different human activities, such as oil exploration. Water pollution, caused by oil spills, industrial waste, infections has led to a scarcity of drinking water and the spread of water-borne diseases. Shell Nigeria’s oil operations, as it is claimed by local people and environmentalists, have had significant detrimental effects on the area. Government support through a local partner gives Shell the opportunity to minimize problematic issues in society and resolve conflict situations. In the case with Ogoni people Shell had the full scaled support of the government, because it is interested in the Nigerian oil production to flourish. So another reason for Shell to cooperate with NNPC was the government support in conflict situation within the country (Mckague 2017).

In Nigeria Shell had to change its internationalization strategy to joint venture, because with this strategy, it was possible to circumvent many restrictions imposed on private companies after the nationalization of oil and gas, which could not be done in the case of FDI. Moreover, in cooperation with local partner it was easier to preserve the security of operations, as the situation with oil theft and its ecological consequences were only got worse over time. Participation in a joint venture with a state-owned company gives Shell the opportunity to more easily resolve conflict situations with the local society and prevent the aggression rise from local residents. 

Exporting strategy was less beneficial for Shell, since from the very beginning, Shell had an increased commitment into the market and was intended to get higher profits. Exporting strategy is not appropriate when the company wants to have full control of the operations and open up new opportunities in exploration on the territory. 
Figure 6 
Reasons to choose internationalization strategy for Shell in Nigeria
Internationalization process             

1936                                                              1979
 FDI                                                                IJV








Compiled by the authors from the data from the data from Reuters (2022); Mckague (2017); Shell (2022); (Resolution Law Firm, 2024)

Figure 6 shows the process of internationalization of Shell in Nigeria and the particular reasons for it to change strategies during the process.

Another country of Shell’s operations discussed in this work will be Venezuela. Shell initiated its activities in Venezuela in the early 1900s, by acquiring two General Asphalt Company subsidiaries, Caribbean Petroleum Company (CPC) and the Colon Development Company Ltd. (CDC). Later, in 1915 Shell acquired the Venezuelan Oil Concessions Ltd. (VOC). Shell found crude oil in commercial quantities for the first time on July 31, 1914, when CPC discovered the large Mene Grande oil field (Kiddle 2021). After the nationalization of oil and gas industry, in 1976, Shell maintains a presence in Venezuela based on Agreements on the maintenance of the refining sector, and Petroleos de Venezuela S.A.  (state-owned company) takes the management of the industry. In 1993, Shell formed a joint venture with PDVSA to operate the Urdaneta West field (Parraga and Ulmer 2018). The primary focus of the company involves the exploration, extraction, and production of crude oil and oil derivatives, along with the production of lubricants (EMIS 2023).

As it is reported by Shell, the cooperation with PDVSA was a crucial shift in the portfolio of the company, as it opened up new opportunities and gave stimulus to further projects. Overall, cooperation accelerated further growth of the oil and gas business and strengthened the position of Shell on Venezuelan market. For instance, the Trinidad and Tabago fields are operated by Shell and PDVSA with the close cooperation with governments of Venezuela and Trinidad (Shell 2018).
As it was stated by Shell, company, society and the government all together work for energy sector in Venezuela to live up to its potential. The local partner provides Shell with additional human resources. Shell expands the geography of its operations and the depth of drilling sharing with PDVSA accelerated technologies and using its labor to speed up production. Shell noted the high contribution of local talents in carrying out effective work at the facilities and to maintain company’s growth aspirations (Shell 2018).
Cooperation with a reliable local partner gives Shell the opportunity to better adapt to political/economic/social changes from outside and inside the country (Shell 2018). 
Shell entered Venezuela with FDI strategy, however, later it was more beneficial for the company to change strategy to the joint venture, it is correlated with the nationalization of the oil and gas industry with the government, the expansion of portfolio with the new projects, which can be started only in a partnership with state-owned company, such as Trinidad and Tabago fields, share of costs, technologies and labor with the local partner, what makes the operations more efficient. Moreover, local partner helps to overcome political and social problems, which rise in such a turbulent state as Venezuela.

The same as in Nigeria, exporting strategy was less beneficial and profitable for Shell in the country, as the company wanted to maximize its market commitment from the start of operations.


Figure 7 
Reasons to choose internationalization strategy for Shell in Venezuela
Internationalization process             

1910                                                              1993
 FDI                                                                IJV











Compiled by the authors from the data from the data from Reuters (2022); Mckague (2017); Shell (2022); (Resolution Law Firm, 2024)

Figure 7 shows the process of internationalization of Shell in Venezuela and the particular reasons for it to change strategies during the process.
Consequently, the main common reasons for Shell’s cooperation with local partners in Nigeria and Venezuela are: the restrictions imposed on private companies after nationalization of oil and gas industry, the new business opportunities, knowledge and adaptation to the laws and rules of the country and the governmental support in conflict situations.
Chapter 3. Findings and recommendations for international oil and gas companies on the strategy choice in the process of internationalization in developing countries
3.1 Research findings on the choice of strategy in the process of internationalization by international oil and gas companies

The research was conducted on the basis of 3 main parts: theoretical analysis, industry analysis and case studies. Tables 1 and 2 show the reasons to choose IJV VS Exporting and VS FDI in the process of internationalization and their mentioning in theoretical studies, industry analysis and case studies of Chevron and Shell in Nigeria and Venezuela.
Table 1
Reasons to choose IJV VS FDI for oil and gas companies: theoretical analysis; industry analysis and case studies

Table 2
Reasons to choose IJV VS Exporting for oil and gas companies: theoretical analysis; industry analysis and case studies

The theoretical part is based on the previous research by authors on the topic of international joint venture choice during the internationalization process. It was identified that the reasons to choose joint venture in developing countries after exporting are: higher profits, opportunity to get market knowledge from local partner, higher market commitment, opportunity to share skills, labor and technologies with local partner, support of the government in political/economic questions, higher level of control over operations, ability to promote social initiatives in the country, new opportunities in the expansion of operations.

If comparing the reasons for choosing an international joint venture with FDI, it can be concluded that they are: restrictions imposed on private companies working in a country alone, less risks, less costs, opportunity to get market knowledge from local partner, opportunity share skills, labor and technologies with local partner, support of the government in political/economic questions, access to natural reserves which cannot be explored without local partner, to avoid socio-cultural problems and conflicts with local communities, to prevent unnecessary expenditure in establishing downstream facilities, ability to promote social initiatives in the country, new opportunities in the expansion of operations, increased security of operations. 

However, different companies pursue different goals in the countries they operate in. For some companies, it is quite enough to stop on exporting and not move to higher levels of market commitment, while other companies want to be fully integrated into the processes taking place in the country and receive much more profit due to this fact.

The reasons why companies chose certain strategies were studied on the basis of interviews with company representatives, valid publications and causal relationships that were traced in countries during a specific period of time.

The industry analysis based on the 45 cases of oil and gas companies choosing joint venture as an internationalization strategy was conducted by the authors. As it was identified, the main reasons for companies to choose joint venture are new opportunities in the expansion of operations (24%), which means that companies want to expand their portfolio, discover new fields, get access to the territories, which were out of reach before the cooperation with local partners. Growth strategy of the company (15%), which implies entering IJVs; restrictions imposed on foreign companies working in a country alone (14%). Moreover, the reason that  partners share skills, labor and technologies (14%) in the implementation of projects and the competitive advantage which company can get working with a local partner (13%).

As the industry analysis based on the study of market entry and the further internationalization process in 15 cases has showed, the main reasons for changing FDI or exporting to a joint venture are: new opportunities in the expansion of operations (32%); higher profits (16% of researched cases); companies expect to get more from the large-scaled projects, in which they participate with local partners; the support of government (11%); which in majority of cases is interested in the success of joint ventures with state-owned companies; the possibility to share skills, technologies and labor (9%); share of costs with local partners (9%); as the projects in oil and gas industry are highly expensive and companies need partners to decrease capital investments; the restrictions on foreign companies working alone (9%).

Analyzing industry in general and concrete case studies of Venezuela and Nigeria it was noted that companies mostly choose joint ventures in specific countries for the same reasons. This is due to the political, economic or social situation in the host countries. External reasons play a significant role in the choice of internationalization strategy, especially, if such reasons are so intense as with the political situation in Venezuela, or security issues in Nigeria. During the case study analysis, it was identified that oil and gas companies in Nigeria (in particular Chevron and Shell) commonly use joint venture in the internationalization process versus exporting in order to get higher profits, higher level of control over operations, ability to promote social initiatives in the country, new opportunities in the expansion of operations.

Companies choose joint venture rather than FDI because they want to overcome restrictions imposed on foreign companies working in the country alone, ability to share the costs of the projects with local partners, ability to promote social initiatives in the country, new opportunities in the expansion of operations, support of the government, increased security of operations especially from crime and oil theft, to avoid socio-cultural problems and conflicts with local communities.

As for the case of Venezuela, companies are more inclined to choose joint venture versus exporting, because they want to get higher profits, higher level of control over operations, ability to promote social initiatives in the country, new opportunities in the expansion of operations, share of skills, labor and technologies with local partner.

Comparing to FDI companies choose joint venture in order to overcome restrictions imposed on foreign companies working in the country alone, get ability to share the costs of the projects with local partners, ability to promote social initiatives in the country, new opportunities in the expansion of operations, support of the government, increased security of operations, to avoid socio-cultural problems and conflicts with local communities, to share risks of the arrangement, skills, labor and technologies.

Research findings also include the fact, that in oil and gas industry, unlike in other industries, companies more often enter the market with FDI strategy, rather than exporting. 

Nationalization of oil and gas industry plays an important role in internationalization strategy choice, as many companies are forced to share the production with local partner. 
3.2 Recommendations for international oil and gas companies in choosing strategy in the process of internationalization

Certainly, all oil and gas companies that enter international markets have their own characteristics, they differ in size, experience, portfolio, capitalization, as well as other factors. However, it is possible to identify a pool of recommendations to oil and gas companies that enter the markets of developing countries and go through the process of internationalization there. 

First of all, if a company only wants to test the ground in a new market and is not ready to invest large capital instantly, it can choose an exporting strategy when initially entering a foreign market. The risks of this strategy are low, since investments in the first stage are limited. However, by choosing this strategy, companies also have limited opportunities and not as large profit as choosing strategies that imply higher market commitment. It is recommended to choose exporting for smaller companies, for which risks are always high and before moving to higher levels of market commitment, they have to make sure that the work in this country will be successful. In this case, exporting becomes a guide to new opportunities in the future. It is a common practice that companies, entering the market with an exporting strategy, later change it to an FDI or joint venture in order to increase market commitment, profits and opportunities. When choosing an FDI, companies should take into account the following factors. Firstly, this strategy significantly increases risks, as cost increase significantly. If the company assumes these risks as commensurate with its capabilities and stands firmly on its feet, than this strategy will suit it. Along with high risks, profits and opportunities also increase, which undoubtedly make FDI an efficient and widespread internationalization strategy.

However, in some countries, the restrictions on the work of international companies are very extensive, and in some cases a company cannot operate in the market without local partners. According to the experience of the companies studied, it is better to choose a strategy of international joint venture with a local partner in order to remove restrictions on work and share the risks that complex oil and gas projects imply. If a company is ready to embark on a large-scale and capital-intensive project, it should consider a joint venture as a strategy to reduce costs on operations. In addition, a reliable local partner can share market knowledge, which is necessary for more effective work on the project. The partner company can also be useful in terms of additional labor, technologies and skills that can be useful in the project implementation. In some countries, in order to have access to key areas for oil and gas exploration and production, it is necessary to work together with a state-owned company. If there are such limitations and the company sees potential in territories that are not yet available to it, it is worth choosing a joint venture strategy for these projects.

The political landscape plays a very important role in the work of oil and gas companies. If the political situation in the country is shaky and there are threats for international companies such as in the example of Venzuela, a joint venture with a state-owned company may be an option, since the government of the country will provide all possible support to the enterprise in which it has its interest. 

Moreover, there may be other external threats in the host country, which a local partner can help to prevent. For example, the criminal situation in the country. Based on the experience of Chevron and Shell in Nigeria, it can be said that the security of enterprises can sometimes be difficult to ensure due to constant attacks from criminal gangs and oil theft. In addition, large amounts of money are spent on protective measures. Thus, if a company enters a market where it is hard to provide the safety of operations, it is better to choose a local partner who is better informed and can help to achieve the result. 

The dissatisfaction of local communities with operations carried out on their territory is also a factor that cannot be ignored. This can be seen by looking at Shell's experience in Nigeria, when the conflict based on the environmental consequences of Shell's activities reached dangerous scale. A local partner with government support can help resolve these conflicts and smooth out the situation without leading to an open confrontation between the company and communities.
Shell's example is not the only one, there are many other such kind of conflicts in the world, as the activities of oil and gas companies are often associated with negative environmental consequences. Accordingly, companies need to competently assess risks, ensure the protection of enterprises from oil spills and other consequences dangerous to the environment, which can also be supported by a local partner who knows the territory better and can predict the results of certain actions.

And the last, but not least, some of the large companies, such as Chevron and Shell, not only conduct large-scale operations in the international market, but also participate in the social life of local communities in different way. If a company wants to carry out various initiatives and social programs, a local partner can provide support to promote the company's initiatives with the help of the government. If a company operating in a foreign market faces restrictions that hinder full-scale operational activities in those countries, such as in Nigeria or Venezuela, it should consider adopting a strategy of international joint venture to bypass the restrictions and avoid profit loss.

Considering Venezuela, oil in this country differs from other locations because it is heavier and more difficult to produce, refine and transport, thereby costs for companies are increased. Entering into a joint venture entails sharing risks and costs, which can significantly facilitate the operations of an international company. Additionally, there is an opportunity to divide labor, skills, and technologies, which is also an important aspect.
3.3 Limitations and recommendations for further research on international joint venture choice
The study was conducted as fully and in-depth as the available resources allowed. However, there were certain limitations that the authors encountered while working on the study. As for the theoretical part, many of the scientific works on the topic of the reasons why international companies choose joint ventures during the internationalization process were blocked for general use and were not studied due to the inability to access the resource.
If resources are available to access these works, it is possible to significantly expand the theoretical base of the study and analyze more material in order to further make the study even more in-depth and accurate. Further elaboration of theoretical materials can reveal previously unexplored aspects of the study and help to form new hypotheses on the topic.
Due to the inability to access databases in which it is possible to clearly and explicitly see which strategies, which companies entered the markets and which strategies were used further in the internationalization process, the analysis was carried out manually and by means of one database. It is possible to expand the sample and increase the number of international companies studied and the markets they entered. With access to bigger databases and statistics on the choice of joint ventures by companies in the process of internationalization, it is possible to significantly deepen the research and find additional reasons for choosing this strategy.

Another limitation of this work may be the lack of statistical data on the number of international joint ventures initiated worldwide by year. This also requires access to knowledge bases, which was limited for the authors. When accessing quantitative information collected by statistics for a certain period of time (for example, 10 years) it is possible to assess trends in the popularity of joint ventures among companies in the process of internationalization. In addition, ideally, it would be possible to track statistics on a large number of companies, how their strategies have changed in the process of internationalization, which has already been partially done in the work.

There were also restrictions on access to materials from specific countries that were studied in the work. Not all materials are publicly available, which reduces the width of the study.

It would be useful to deepen the research through personal interviews with representatives of companies, however, these opportunities for the authors were limited. These interviews will be a good continuation of the authors' work and will serve as an additional source of identification of the reasons for choosing joint ventures.

In the future, the study can be expanded beyond the existing topic and, in addition to the developing countries on which the work is currently based, it is possible to analyze the choice of joint venture strategies by companies in developed countries and identify common reasons, which can help unify the strategy for working in foreign markets of those companies that operate in both developed and developing countries. Moreover, other internationalization strategies can be analyzed more precisely in order to make the sample in the industry analysis not only based on those companies that changed their strategy to a joint venture during internationalization, but also on those that entered country with a joint venture strategy and then changed it to another one.

Thus, despite the fact that extensive and in-depth analysis was carried out, the authors still faced some limitations. In the future, the work may be expanded and deepened using materials that were not available to the authors at the moment.


Conclusion

In conclusion, the internationalization process is indeed associated with great risks that oil and gas companies must foresee in order not to fail expensive projects on the host market.

An international joint venture becomes a good choice for companies that face similar risks, whether political, economic or social. Each market is unique in its own way, but there is a certain set of reasons and circumstances why it is advantageous for international companies to choose international joint venture as the internationalization strategy. This set of reasons was widely discussed in the work, so as the steps on which choosing joint venture is necessary.



















References

Adebowale, F., Iwuozo, G., Udo-Okon A. (2023). Energy: Oil & Gas 2023. Chambers and Partners Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 https://practiceguides.chambers.com/practice-guides/energy-oil-gas-2023/nigeria/trends-and-developments

Agarwal, S., Ramaswami, S. N. (1992). Choice of foreign market entry mode: Impact of ownership, location and internalization factors. Journal of International business studies, 1-27.

Agndal, H. (2004). Internationalisation as a process of strategy and change: a study of 16 Swedish industrial SMEs. Doctoral dissertation, Internationella Handelshögskolan.

Almohsen, A. S. (2015). Joint Ventures in the Oil and Gas Industry (Unpublished doctoral thesis). University of Calgary, Calgary, AB. doi:10.11575/PRISM/26692.

Anderson, D. (2023). Joint Ventures in Megaprojects: Strategic Positioning for Challenging Times. Systech Website. Retrieved March 25, 2023 from https://www.systech-int.com/insights/thoughts/joint-ventures-in-megaprojects-strategic-positioning-for-challenging-times

Aramco (2019). Saudi Aramco signs 12 agreements with South Korean partners worth billions of dollars. Aramco Website. Retrieved March 25, 2024 from https://www.aramco.com/en/news-media/news/2019/aramco-12-agreements-korea-partners

Beamish, P. W. (1986). Joint venture performance in developing countries.

Bleeke, J., & Ernst, D. (1991). The way to win in cross-border alliances. Harvard business review, 69(6), 127-135.

BP (2023). BP in the Middle East. BP Website. Retrieved March 21 from https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/careers/careers-bp-in-middle-east.pdf

Bradley, F. (2005). International marketing strategy. Pearson Education.

Buckley, P. J., Casson, M. C. (1998). Analyzing foreign market entry strategies: Extending the internalization approach. Journal of international business studies, 29, 539-561.

Calof, J. L., Beamish, P. W. (1995). Adapting to foreign markets: Explaining internationalization. International business review, 4(2), 115-131.

Carter, S. (1997). Global agricultural marketing management. Food & Agriculture Org.

Caves, R. (1971). Industrial economics of foreign investment: the case of the international corporation. J. World Trade L., 5, 30.

CFI (2023). Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). Corporate Finance Institute Website. Retrieved April 9, 2023 from https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/economics/foreign-direct-investment-fdi/
Chevron (2017). 2017 corporate responsibility report. Chevron in Nigeria. Chevron Website. Retrieved March 15 from https://www.chevron.com/-/media/shared-media/documents/chevron-nigeria-cr-report-2017.pdf
Chevron (2023). Reflecting on 100 years of progress in Venezuela. Chevron Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.chevron.com/newsroom/2023/q2/reflecting-on-100-years-of-progress-in-venezuela
Chevron (2024). Venezuela. Chevron Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.chevron.com/worldwide/venezuela

Chevron (2024). Argentina. Chevron Website. Retrieved March 20, 2024 from https://www.chevron.com/worldwide/argentina
Companies Market Cap (2024). Largest oil and gas companies by market cap. Companies Market Cap Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://companiesmarketcap.com/oil-gas/largest-oil-and-gas-companies-by-market-cap/
Cossa, C., Mondlane, I., Baguandji, J., Cordeiro, L., Numaio, T., Sitoe, V. (2019). Nationalization and Privatisation of Petroleum Industry: An Evaluation of the Pros and Cons. Covenant Journal of Business and Social Sciences, 10(2).
Cui, L., Jiang, F. (2009). FDI entry mode choice of Chinese firms: A strategic behavior perspective. Journal of World Business, 44(4), 434-444.
Delgado, G., Corban J., Miele F. (2023). Energy: Oil & Gas 2023. Chambers and Partners Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://practiceguides.chambers.com/practice-guides/energy-oil-gas-2023/venezuela/trends-and-developments
Deloitte (2023). US Oil and Gas Outlook 2023. Deloitte Website. Retrieved March 20, 2024 from https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/energy-resources/us-oil-and-gas-outlooks-2023.pdf
Dudnik, A. (2020). Methodological approach to risk-assignment for joint ventures in energy industry. In E3S Web of Conferences (Vol. 177, p. 05023). EDP Sciences.

Dzaka-Kikouta, T. (2020). What Have We Learnt of Joint Ventures in the Internationalization Process of Chinese Multinationals (MNCs)? Evidence from Central Africa, 13(3), 82-102.

EMIS (2023). SHELL VENEZUELA S.A. (VENEZUELA). EMIS Website. Retrieved January 16, 2024 from https://www.emis.com/php/company-profile/VE/Shell_Venezuela_SA_en_1280061.html

EIA (2019). Venezuela. Energy Information Administration Website. Retrieved March 20, 2024 from https://www.eia.gov/international/analysis/country/VEN/background
EIA (2023). Venezuela's heavy crude oil output increases are limited following U.S. sanctions relief. Energy Information Administration Website. Retrieved March 20, 2024 from https://www.eia.gov/Todayinenergy/detail.php?id=60762
Erramilli, M. K., Rao, C. P. (1993). Service firms’ international entry-mode choice: A modified transaction-cost analysis approach. Journal of marketing, 57(3), 19-38.

Exxon Mobil (2023). Our history in Indonesia. Exxon Mobil Website. Retrieved January 29, 2024 from https://www.exxonmobil.co.id/company/overview/who-we-are/our-history-in-indonesia
Frynas, J. G., Beck, M. P., Mellahi, K. (2000). Maintaining corporate dominance after decolonization: the ‘first mover advantage’of Shell‐BP in Nigeria. Review of African Political Economy, 27(85), 407-425.

Gazprom (2024). Algeria. Gazprom Website. Retrieved April 05, 2024 from https://www.gazprom-international.com/operations/algeria/

Global Americans (2023). Venezuela’s Oil Sector. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://theglobalamericans.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/2023.01.25-Venezuelas-Oil-Sector-A-Global-Americans-Explainer.pdf
Gomes-Casseres, B. (1996). The alliance revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Goodnow, J. D., Hansz, J. E. (1972). Environmental determinants of overseas market entry strategies. Journal of International Business Studies, 33-50.

Grant, R. M., & Cibin, R. (1996). Strategy, structure and market turbulence: the international oil majors, 1970–1991. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 12(2), 165-188.

Gullander, S. (1976). Joint ventures in Europe: determinants of entry. International Studies of Management & Organization, 6(1-2), 85-111.

Hennart, J. F. (1991). The transaction costs theory of joint ventures: An empirical study of Japanese subsidiaries in the United States. Management science, 37(4), 483-497.

Inkpen, A. C., Beamish, P. W. (1997). Knowledge, bargaining power, and the instability of international joint ventures. Academy of management review, 22(1), 177-202.

IEA (2023). Medium-Term Gas Report 2023. IEA Website. Retrieved January 18, 2024 from https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/f2cf36a9-fd9b-44e6-8659-c342027ff9ac/Medium-TermGasReport2023-IncludingtheGasMarketReportQ4-2023.pdf
IEA (2023). Oil 2023. Analysis and Forecast to 2028. IEA Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/cc7fd38f-3d68-4796-a958-8dfa3f3ef4a6/Oil2023.pdf
IEA (2023). World Energy Outlook 2023. IEA Website. Retrieved January 18, 2024 from https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2023
International Trade Administration (2024). Nigeria – Country Commercial Guide. International Trade Administration Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/nigeria-oil-gas-and-mining-sectors#:~:text=Nigeria%20is%20among%20the%20world's,of%20large%20volumes%20crude%20oil
James, R. A. (2011). Strategic alliances between national and international oil companies. In Pillsbury Energy Conference, Lansdowne, Virginia (Vol. 3).

Janakiramanan, S., Asjeet S, L. (2004). International joint ventures and political risk. International Business Research Conference, Melbourne, 15-16 November 2004. 

Jelinek, M., Pettit, J. (2012). The joint venture (JV) handbook. IHS Consulting-Strategic Advisory & Transaction Support, September.

Johanson, J., Vahlne, J. E. (1977). The internationalization process of the firm—a model of knowledge development and increasing foreign market commitments. Journal of international business studies, 8, 23-32.

Johansson, J. K. (2005). Global marketing: Foreign entry, local marketing, and global management. Fourth Edition. Chicago, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.  

Kaplan, Z. (2018). Chevron’s corporate social enterprise in Nigeria. ECDPM Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://ecdpm.org/work/leveraging-private-investment-for-sustainable-development-volume-7-issue-2-spring-2018/chevrons-corporate-social-enterprise-in-nigeria

Khan, M. H. (2020). Shift Management in Oil and Gas Field Workers. SRRN Website. Retrieved February 20, 2024 from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3567909  

Khanna, T., Palepu, K. (1997). Why focused strategies. Harvard business review, 75(4), 41-51.

Kiddle, A. M. (2021). Energy in the Americas; Energy in the Americas: Critical Reflections on Energy and History; Critical Reflections on Energy and History (p. 416). University of Calgary Press.

Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Ang, S. H., Leong, S. M., Tan, C. T., Ho-Ming, O. (2012). Principles of marketing: an Asian perspective. London, UK: Pearson/Prentice-Hall.

Kresser, R. (1971). PERSONNEL PROBLEMS IN INTERNATIONAL COMPANIES: THE EXAMPLE OF THE SIEMENS COMPANY. International Studies of Management & Organization, 1(4), 394–406. 

Lipin (2019). Chinese Energy Giant Was Under US Pressure to Exit Iran Gas Project. VOA Website. Retrieved March 23, 2024 from https://www.voanews.com/a/usa_reports-chinese-energy-giant-was-under-us-pressure-exit-iran-gas-project/6177237.html
Lukoil (2007). LUKOIL DISCOVERED OIL IN CONDOR BLOCK, COLOMBIA. Lukoil Website. Retrieved March 18, 2024 from https://www.lukoil.com/PressCenter/Pressreleases/Pressrelease/lukoil-discovered-oil-in-condor-block-colombia

Lukoil (2012). LUKOIL STARTS PRODUCTION AT JUNIN-6 BLOCK IN VENEZUELA. Lukoil Website. Retrieved March 18, 2024 from https://www.lukoil.com/PressCenter/Pressreleases/Pressrelease/lukoil-starts-production-at-junin-6-block-in

Malhotra, N. K., Agarwal, J., & Ulgado, F. M. (2003). Internationalization and Entry Modes: A Multitheoretical Framework and Research Propositions. Journal of International Marketing, 11(4), 1–31. 

Mawanda, Y. (2022). Joint ventures in the oil and gas sector and how they are taxed. PWC Website. Retrieved February 22, 2023 from https://www.pwc.com/ug/en/press-room/joint-ventures-in-the-oil-and-gas-sector.html

Mckague (2017). Shell, Nigeria, and the Ogoni: Prospects for Reconciliation and Sustainable Development. Schulich School of Business. York University. 
Mordor Intelligence (2024). Nigeria Oil and Gas Companies. Mordor Intelligence Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/nigeria-oil-and-gas-market/companies


Mordor Intelligence (2024). Venezuela Oil and Gas Market Size & Share Analysis - Growth Trends & Forecasts (2024 - 2029). Mordor Intelligence Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/venezuela-oil-and-gas-market
Moreira, A., Navaia, E., Ribau, C. (2022). Moderation Effects of Government Institutional Support, Active and Reactive Internationalization Behavior on Innovation Capability and Export Performance. Economies, 10(8), 177.

Nanu, V. C. T. (2010). International joint ventures. Doctoral dissertation, KDI School.

Novais, A. L. M., do Nascimento João, B. (2016). Cultural influences on entry mode choice in international business: an assessment and review. Revista de Gestão e Projetos, 7(1), 01-14.

Odediran, S., Windapo, A., (2016). Political risks perception and mitigation using joint venture (JV) entry model.

Orazgaliyev, S. (2019). State ownership and nationalization in energy sector: The case of Kazakhstan's oil industry (No. 1042). ADBI Working Paper Series.

PDVSA (2023). About PDVSA. Retrieved January 16, 2024 from https://dbpedia.org/page/PDVSA

Parraga, M., Ulmer. A. (2018). Shell seeks to sell Venezuela JV stake to France's Maurel & Prom. Reuters website. 

Peng, M. W. (2000). Business strategies in transition economies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Pereira, D. (2023). Chevron Business Model. The Business Model Analyst Website. Retrieved April 30, 2024 from https://businessmodelanalyst.com/chevron-business-model/

Petersen, B., Welch, L. (2002). Foreign Operation Mode Combinations and Internationalization. Journal of Business Research, Vol. 55, pp. 157-162.

Pettit, J. (2011). Private Sector Capital Strategies for Public Service Infrastructure. 

Porter, M. E. (1990). The competitive advantage of nations. New York Free Press.

Pretel, A. (2007) Exxon to cede oil project ops to Venezuela by May. Reuters Website. Retrieved 20 March, 2024 https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSN01271632/

Rapier (2019). Charting the Decline of Venezuela’s Oil Industry. Forbes website.

Reddy, K. S., Xie, E. (2017). Cross-border mergers and acquisitions by oil and gas multinational enterprises: Geography-based view of energy strategy. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 72, 961-980.

Resolution Law Firm (2024). JOINT VENTURES IN THE NIGERIA OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY. Resolution Law Firm Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.resolutionlawng.com/joint-venture-in-the-nigeria-oil-and-gas-industry/   

Reuters (2018). Timeline: Shell's operations in Nigeria. Reuters Website. Retrieved March 14, 2024 from https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1M306D/

Reuters (2022). Shell Nigeria says crude oil theft an existential threat to industry. Reuters Website. Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/shell-nigeria-says-crude-oil-theft-an-existential-threat-industry-2022-07-06/

Rivero M., García-Soto C., Ramírez J. (2023). Oil & Gas Laws and Regulations Venezuela 2023-2024. ICLG Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://iclg.com/practice-areas/oil-and-gas-laws-and-regulations/venezuela

Ruano R. (2023). Chevron’s oil production license signals Venezuela’s re-entry to the international economy, but its economy and people remain in crisis. LSE Website. Retrieved from https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/usappblog/2023/02/27/chevrons-oil-production-license-signals-venezuelas-re-entry-to-the-international-economy-but-its-economy-and-people-remain-in-crisis/

S&P Global (2021). Nigeria's oil industry at risk as security threats increase. S&P Global Website. Retrieved March 15, 2024 from https://www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/en/market-insights/latest-news/oil/082721-nigerias-oil-industry-at-risk-as-security-threats-increase.

Salar, M., Salar, O. (2014). Determining pros and cons of franchising by using swot analysis. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 122, 515-519.


Savannah Energy (2023). Nigeria. Country Overview. Savannah Energy Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.savannah-energy.com/operations/nigeria-3/overview/

Schellenberg, M., Harker, M. J., Jafari, A. (2018). International market entry mode–a systematic literature review. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 26(7), 601-627.

Sharma, V. M., Erramilli, M. K.  (2004). Resource-based explanation of entry mode choice. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 12 (1), 1-18. 

Shell (2018). Trinidad and Tabago. Shell Website. Retrieved January 16, 2024 from https://www.shell.com/who-we-are/contact-us/contact-trinidad.html

Shell (2022). Nigeria Briefing Notes. For 2022 Business Activities. Shell Website. Retrieved January 16, 2024 from https://www.shell.com.ng/media/nigeria-reports-and-publications-briefing-notes/_jcr_content/par/textimage.stream/1681918042830/ef341b12093c600c71129c24ea276795715f1629/shell-nigeria-briefing-notes-2022.pdf

Shell (2024). Our Joint Ventures. Shell Website. Retrieved January 16, 2024 from https://www.shell.com/business-customers/chemicals/about-shell-chemicals/our-joint-ventures.html

Spetalnick M., Parraga M. (2023). US broadly eases Venezuela oil sanctions after election deal. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/us-easing-venezuela-oil-sanctions-response-election-deal-official-2023-10-18/

Stevens, L. C. (1972). Joint Ventures in the International Petroleum Industry. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition? (pp. SPE-3975). SPE.

Stewart, M. R., Maughn, R. D. (2011). International joint ventures, a practical approach. Davis Wright Tremaine LLP. Seattle.

Straits Research (2023). Oil and Gas Pipeline Market size, Industry Insights, Forecast Analysis 2031. Straits Research Website. Retrieved January 06, 2024 from https://straitsresearch.com/report/oil-and-gas-pipeline-market

The Business Research Company (2023). Oil and Gas Global Market Report. The Business Research Company Website. Retrieved January 13, 2024 from https://www.thebusinessresearchcompany.com/report/oil-and-gas-global-market-report#:~:text=The%20global%20oil%20and%20gas%20market%20size%20grew%20from%20%246%2C989.65,(CAGR)%20of%204.9%25 

Tong, T. W., Reuer, J. J., Peng, M. W. (2008). International joint ventures and the value of growth options. Academy of Management Journal, 51(5), 1014-1029.

Vasudevan, H., Zolghadri, S., Makarem, M. A. (2023). Introduction to oil, gas, and petrochemical industries: importance to the current world. In Crises in Oil, Gas and Petrochemical Industries (pp. 25-46). Elsevier.

Vernon, R. (1966). International trade and international investment in the product cycle. Quarterly journal of economics, 80(2), 190-207.

Yavaş, U., Eroğlu, D., Eroğlu, S. (1994). Sources and management of conflict: The case of Saudi-US joint ventures. Journal of International Marketing, 2(3), 61-82.

Young, M., Moffat J. (2012). International Oil And Gas Joint Ventures In Emerging Markets. Corporate Counsel Business Journal Website. Retrieved February 20, 2023 from https://ccbjournal.com/articles/international-oil-and-gas-joint-ventures-emerging-markets

Yu, C. M. J., Tang, M. J. (1992). International Joint Ventures: Theoretical Considerations. Managerial and Decision Economics, 13(4), 331–342. 

Zephyr (2019). Cross-border JV deals in oil industry. NACE Rev.2.

Zhaoxian, X. (2001). Chinese petroleum industry analysis and entry strategies.






























Appendices

Appendix 1
Reasons to choose joint venture in the internationalization process

Complied by the authors from the data from Zephyr (2019)








Appendix 2
Reasons to choose joint venture after FDI/Exporting in the internationalization process

Complied by the authors from the data from Pretel (2007); Exxon Mobil (2023); BP (2023); Aramco (2019); Lipin (2019); Gazprom (2024); Lukoil (2007); Lukoil (2012); Chevron (2024); Shell (2024)















