


The Government of Russian Federation
State Budgetary Higher Education Unit
National Research University
«Higher School of Economics»

Faculty of World Economy and World Politics

«International Program 'International Relations and Global Studies'»

Thesis paper
On the topic:
«The Specifics of Austrian International Development Aid Policy (2014-2020) »

By the student
of the 4th year,
group 216
Belikova Irina

Academic supervisor:
Korneev Oleg V.
Co-supervisor:
Pivovarenko Alexander A.

Moscow 2025


Introduction
Relevance
The actions of D. Trump's administration after taking office for a second term in terms of suspending the activities of USAID (an organization that for more than 60 years had been distributing the budget for various humanitarian aid programs to developing countries) have highlighted a pressing problem for Western, primarily American, development aid policy - the crisis of legitimacy (Pelliciarri, 2025) . The ongoing reorganization and potential curtailment of official US aid to third (mostly developing) countries could potentially tip the scales in this area in Europe's favour, placing the burden of aid on Europe and thus strengthening its global actorness. However, in this context, there can be a threat of a similar legitimacy crisis recurring on European territory. The question of whether there are preconditions for a similar crisis in European development aid policy remains important and unanswered. This paper attempts to unravel this problem through a detailed investigation of a little-studied but important country case of Austrian development aid policy in the EU context. 
 The phenomenon of international development aid still exists and is widely used by various countries. What does international development assistance even entail? The average person would describe international development as support provided by developed countries or international organizations to promote the economic, social and environmental development of low- and middle-income countries. It varies and includes funds, technical assistance in infrastructure creation, resources and knowledge to address problems such as poverty, lack of education, poor health conditions, environmental problems and various types of inequality. It can imply bilateral or multilateral aid. Moreover, it plays a key role in achieving sustainable development, mitigating humanitarian crises, overcoming poverty, and strengthening global stability. For many European Union states, these values are a priority, and hence international development aid remains relevant. The growing interdependence of states forces even small states to participate in international development initiatives, as they can even have a significant impact on international development. Austria chosen in this paper is precisely a small state which is always faced with a difficult choice. But what is it to be a small state? According to Steinmetz and Wivel (2016) there are states that have limited resources, small territories and populations, and high dependence on external factors, including international trade, security and diplomatic support. However, being small is also beneficial. Due to their compactness, small states are able to be flexible and respond quickly to necessary changes. They often act as mediators in international conflicts, promoting peace using their status of neutrality (for example, in states such as Austria and Switzerland). They offer unusual approaches to solving global sustainable development problems (they can be “laboratories” for researching the implementation of a green economy, for example), and they are active in international development aid. The relevance of studying Austria's international development policy can be attributed to several factors. First, its study illustrates how the small states described above can be important and unique due to their adaptability to a rapidly changing global environment, playing the role of mediators in conflicts. Also, Austrian experience provides a deeper understanding of the role of small states in global politics, their potential and limitations, which is increasingly relevant in a multipolar world. Moreover, the geographical location of Austria in the heart of the European Union adds to Austria's international profile. However, Austrian international development aid is specific and unusual. This study will analyze the main trends in this Austrian policy as well as the factors that influence this particular formulation of Austrian international development policy and will try to connect peculiarities of policies with the Austrian small-state position. The chronological scope of the study will cover the years 2014 to 2020 as the best time period in which some important events for the study of Austrian international development aid took place.
Literature review
This paper draws on two main strata of academic literature. The first is the theoretical literature on the foreign policy behaviour of small states and the factors influencing it. We refer to Austria as a small state, following the tradition adopted in the Austrian school of international relations, for example in “Ambitious and Apathic, Principled and Pragmatic: Austrian Foreign Policy in the Second Republic” by Senn, M., Eder, F., & Kornprobst, M. (2022) and “Handbuch Außenpolitik Österreichs” also by Senn, M., Eder, F., & Kornprobst, M. (2023)  The first chapter will elaborate on the existing definitions and characteristics of small states and will demonstrate which characteristics are appropriate for Austria and which are not.
According to Keohane (1969) small states can be shadows of their larger counterparts, can often be dependent on them, and consequently small states often make alliances with larger ones and have some aid and protection from them. It is worth noting that international development assistance is precisely a kind of help from big states to small states, which can be the goal of “small” states in adhering to big states and following their policies.
The same idea can be found in Kassimeris (2009) who argues that the most common way for small states to have a presence on the world stage is to participate in policies or operations initiated by larger neighbors, that is, to align themselves with the policies of larger states.
The paper of Gvalia et al. (2013) suggests that small states would rather support large states than balance with potential hegemons on a par with their neighbors, since balancing is the domain of large powerful states. In this idea they refer to Levy (1989) which says that in maintaining the world system it is the destiny of small states located in the neighborhood of large powers to follow their policies to ensure their survival.
Walt (1990) also says that “The weaker the state, the more likely it is to band- wagon” because balancing potential hegemons can ruin them due to lack of their own resources and delayed help from allies.
Hey, (2003) notes that small states can be poor or rich. However, both have been “bound” in their foreign policy since the end of the cold war by the expanding influence of all kinds of international organizations, foe example, for rich small states this is a threat to their protected status in their desire to increase influence and achieve goals in their region.
In the opinion of Barston (2024) some small states have a very low level of international involvement and if have, only with their neighbors because of their limited interests, which most often consist mostly of their own security and survival. 
Vital (1971) argues that due to small states’ possible problems with economic and political stability and limitedness of resource the dependence on bigger states appears and then, small states can be only recipients from their larger colleagues in the international development aid chain. Good examples of European recipients of international development aid include Malta and Cyprus, which have long used donor funding to build a sustainable economic model and improve infrastructure and social services that they lacked the resources to do themselves. 
However, Höll (1983) notes that small states are trying to minimize the risks of dependence on large states and are developing increasingly flexible foreign policy strategies, which could theoretically include a strategy of international development aid, but small states must have sufficient resources and capacity to do so. 
However, at the same time, evidence of “donation” by small states can be found in academic sources. For example, Hoadley (1980) argues that small states that are donors rather than recipients of aid are often more responsible in providing aid than large states. 
Austria is such a “rare” small donor of international development aid that it is worth examining the main trends in its international development aid policy. Austrian aid is mainly focused on the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, Africa, and Asia. The main areas of Austrian international aid are health care, education, promotion of sustainable economic growth and social development (Obrovsky 2005). 
To a large extent, this list of areas can be explained by Austria's neutrality coupled with the desire to avoid political and military conflicts in the partner countries. According to Lightfoot and Obrovsky (2016) Austria was initially guided by the principles of helping to combat global problems such as poverty and disregard for human rights, but since the beginning of the 21st century they have been joined by an emphasis on strengthening ties with neighboring countries through corresponding changes in development aid policy. For example, Austria has begun to strengthen ties with the Balkan countries, and its aid has begun to extend not only to developing countries, but also to neighboring European countries that are at risk of instability or, for example, migration crises. 
It can be said that Austria is trying to “regionalize” its international development aid. The Three-Year Programme on Austrian Development Policy 2022–2024 by the Federal Ministry Republic of Austria re-emphasizes the pursuit of global security, addressing poverty in developing countries, promoting sustainable development, etc. It is also stated that Austria pays special attention to cooperation with international organizations (such as the United Nations, European Union and World Bank). It can be concluded that Austria is actively involved in international aid as a “small donor”. At the same time, the state seeks to structure its policy to meet global challenges and strengthen ties with neighboring countries.
The second stratum of academic literature reviewed in this paper is the works devoted to international development assistance policy, its institutional, political and financial aspects. This paper narrows the ‘distance’ between these two strands of research by using Austria as an example of the specific foreign policy behaviour of successful small countries in the role of international aid donors. This line of enquiry is rather atypical for development aid studies, as small countries are usually the recipients of aid (for example, Dimond, V., Rajah, R., & Hammersley, G. (2024) and their “How Can the World Bank Better Support Climate-Vulnerable Lower-Income Small States? An IDA Policy Agenda for Small States” or “Donor Assistance to the Republic of Moldova” by Devaid limited (2016) and the actorness of the sponsor in this context remains understudied.   
Here, according to De Haan, (2009) the phenomenon of international development assistance can be divided into two subtypes: bilateral aid, which goes directly from the donor country to the recipient country, and multilateral aid, which is directed by donors to recipient countries through international organizations such as the United Nations, the EU, and the World Bank.
Degnbol-Martinussen & Engberg-Pedersen (2003) argues that participants in the international development assistance system can be not only international organizations, individual countries, but also non-governmental organizations, which means that the phenomenon of international development assistance can be not only inter-State in nature.
From a historical perspective, the leader in providing international development assistance has been the US since the donors are often rich countries. According to Little and Clifford (1965), it all started with the U.S. providing aid to its colonies, as well as Roosevelt's “good-neighbor policy”. According to Carbone (2007) the European Union also started with bilateral aid to its colonies because of its economic power and possibilities.
Talking about the preconditions and reasons for international development assistance, it has interesting pitfalls. For example, according to Brown (2017) donor countries can have their own reasons for providing aid. They often aim to increase their influence in a target region, but not always with a selfless desire to help. 
Williams (2013) talks about the economic benefits of international development assistance as addressing the existing problems of the recipient country can elevate its economic well-being and contribute to the economic presence of the donor country in the region.
Research gap
Based on the literature reviewed, it can be concluded that Austria's involvement in international development aid in general and some policies in particular may be influenced by Austria's characteristics as a small state and its particular behavior on the world stage. However, this topic is little explored and can be considered a research gap and serve as a novelty of this study.
Research question and hypothesis
In order to highlight the specifics of Austrian international development aid, it is necessary to answer the following question: How small states’ foreign policy-thinking is reflected in the Austrian international development aid policy? However, it is impossible to know in advance exactly how foreign policy thinking of small states affects Austrian policy specifically. Therefore, this study will propose two hypotheses: a working hypothesis and an alternative one, which will be tested in three regional clusters, namely the Balkan, the post-Soviet and the African clusters (more about this in the research structure section). Working hypothesis: The specificity of Austrian international development aid in third countries is explained by the need of burden-sharing with allies, which is a direct consequence of Austria's position as a small state in the country's foreign policy alliances. At the same time Austria’s behaviour can be explained by alternative hypothesis: The specificity of Austrian international development aid in third countries is explained by Austria's own foreign policy ambitions, which are not affected by its position as a small state in that country's foreign policy alliances. Thus, the object of the study is Austrian foreign policy, and the subject, in turn, is Austrian development assistance policy. The hypotheses will be tested by several indicators, namely by such parameters as A) Austrian financial and institutional autonomy/integration with the EU development aid policies. this criterion can be verified by analyzing specific Austrian international development assistance projects, namely a detailed study of the project operators and their sources of funds; B) the presence of other significant political and economic forms of Austria's foreign policy presence in the countries under study, in addition to the format of “donor-recipient” relations developed within the framework of international development aid policy.
Methodology and methods
This section will describe the research methodology and the main methods that will be used to test the hypotheses and answer the research question. The central theoretical construct of the study will be the concept of small states, which was first proposed in realism and its followers (Waltz (1979), Keohane (1969)5, Baker Fox (1959)35, Katzenstein (1985)41, Rothstein (1968)40 ). To begin with, it is worth noting that by design the study could be classified as an explanatory study, as it seeks to explain the relationship between Austria as a small state and its foreign policy, as well as to explain why Austria pursues this particular international development aid policy. The main research data collection methods will be both primary (case study analysis of Balkan, post-Soviet and African clusters) and secondary - desk research, which in turn can also be primary and secondary. 
The main method of primary data collection is the compilation of a database (Appendix 1 and 2) based on Austrian Development Agency statistics and reports. The data collection procedure was as follows - collecting information on Official Development Assistance (ODA) funding source institutions through bilateral and multilateral channels, collecting information on areas and regions to which Austria sends aid. The analysis and processing of the collected data included the following steps: the most relevant parameters for this study were identified among the bilateral and multilateral expenditures of Austria, the participating institutions were selected, then the information from the reports for the years 2014-2020 was compiled into one database with the above mentioned parameters. Moreover, all projects implemented during the study period were structured by country, as well as by the nature of the projects, cost, funding source and project operator.
Thus, in view of the heterogeneity of the analysis required, the most appropriate solution would be to use mixed methods of data collection and analysis in this work. Some limitations may be encountered as the study progresses. International development aid policy is difficult to study because of the low public disclosure of records in this area. However, within the framework of this study the limitation is not significant and dangerous as the main objective is to find general trends of international development aid in Austria and to correlate them with the behavior of small states on the world stage.
Research structure
The research design of the work determines the following structure of the study. The first chapter is of an overview and theoretical background. It is aimed at revealing the following tasks:
1.1 Examine the theoretical foundations for explaining the foreign policy behavior of small states;
1.2 Apply the studied theoretical postulates to the practical example of Austria and show to what extent Austria can be characterized as a small state, whether it is a typical or atypical case of small states;
1.3 Examine the institutional and political foundations of Austrian foreign policy;
Chapter Two directly analyzes official development assistance. This includes the following research tasks:
2.1 Review the history and context of official development assistance policy as a phenomenon in international relations, describing key approaches to measuring ODA effectiveness and explaining donor motivation.
2.2 Characterize the overall framework of Austrian development assistance policy, including through indicators and indicators derived from the analysis, processing and interpretation of the data collected in the database (Annex 1), such as key areas of Austrian ODA spending as well as its sources, main channels of Austrian ODA and the database of all Austrian development aid project on the investigated period.
	Three key regional areas of Austrian development assistance policy have been identified - Balkan cluster, Post-Soviet cluster, and African cluster - as a result of the second chapter. In the third chapter, we intend to delve deeper into the context of Austrian foreign policy in these regions and show how development assistance policy matters in this vein. Accordingly, the structuring of the third chapter is based on a geographical criterion:
3.1 Examine Austria's key framework, principles, objectives and strategies in the Balkan region, and define the role of the Austrian ODA in the context of Austria's foreign policy strategy in the region;
3.2 Examine Austria's key frameworks, principles, objectives and strategies in the Post-Soviet region, and define the role of the Austrian ODA in the context of Austria's foreign policy strategy in the region;
3.3 Examine Austria's key frameworks, principles, objectives and strategies in the African region, identify the role of the Austrian ODA in the context of Austria's foreign policy strategy in the region.

Chapter 1
1.1. Foreign policy behaviour of small states: theoretical justification
There are a huge number of small states in the world today according to Corbett, Yi-chong and Weller, (2021), only states that are small and are members of the UN - more than a hundred, while the science of international relations has long paid greater attention to the foreign policy behavior of only large powers, assuming that small states will behave in the same way. However, Micallef Grimaud, (2018) said that “a single universal definition of a small state does not exist” and hence the identification of small states becomes more complicated. There are several sets of definitions of small states. Some are based on quantitative parameters assessing the physical characteristics of the state, such as shortage of capabilities and resources, territory, military and economic capabilities. A separate role is given to the most common determinant among scholars - the size of the population, as this factor has a direct correlation with the others (Thorhallson, 2018). However, there is a controversy concerning the clear numerical values sufficient to recognize a state as a small.
Vital (1967) set the limit at 20-30 million. East (1973), in turn, defined the upper threshold at 23,7 million. At the same time, Corbett and Veenendaal (2018) are speaking about only 1 million. Atteridge and Savvidou (2019) indicate a bar of 1,5 million people. The middle and thus most optimal for the study are the views of Braveboy-Wagner (2003), Barston (2024) and Pace (2000) who define the upper limit of 10 million people for small states. 
The second group of definitions emphasizes the strength and capabilities of states on the world stage compared to their competitors. From a classical realism perspective, small states are powerless weak states subject to the will of the strong in the international arena. Baker Fox (1959), claims that if a state can not show the power against the will of other states that is enough to be a small state. For a neorealist Keohane (1969) inability to make a meaningful contribution to the development of the system of international relations explained by the need for cooperation with the stronger for burnout - a meaningful criterion for “smallness”. There is a perception that small States are just ordinary countries that do not have great or middle power status (Neumann & De Carvalho 2015, and Morgenthau 1972). Two scenarios can be assumed for the behaviour of small states. First, they were traditionally expected to prefer (more often than not) to form alliances with larger actors in order to achieve security and political and economic protection from rivals. In case of reluctance to join alliances, there is a second option - neutrality. That is, the power politics approach assumes that the fundamental aspect is foreign policy, which can be aimed at creating alliances for survival or, on the contrary, at neutrality and selective contacts with superpowers in case of emergency (Braveboy-Wagner, 2007).
Also of note is the concept “penetration” put forward by James Rosenau. He argues that small states, which often seek allies for survival, have a high level of external influence otherwise known as “penetration”, which means that small states can be subject to the influence of foreign states, international organizations and other external actors (Braveboy-Wagner, 2007)39. 
Moreover, according to Braveboy-Wagner, (2007)39, an important criterion after the 1980s is the impact of economic dependence due to structural weaknesses on the behavior of small states. Following research with the UN vote as the main indicator of foreign policy behavior, two potential models have been put forward to explain the positions of small states: 1 - the bargaining model of negotiations between big and small states, in which the votes of small states in the UN were correlated with economic aid to them, and the related compliance model, in which small states changed their decision to the convenience of the dominant partner for economic reasons (security); and 2 - the consensus model, which puts the head of the state in the hands of the dominant partner.
The third group, in the spirit of the constructivist tradition of theories of international relations, combines definitions related to the internal self-determination of the state. Small states can be defined as countries that, in the opinion of their internal governance apparatus, are unable to maintain their security without cooperation with international organizations/stronger global actors (Rothstein, 1968). 
Hey (2003)10 pays attention to the state's sense of itself on the world stage. If a state considers itself small and incapable of serious influence, it may be considered small. Despite the fact that such an approach looks somewhat subjective or perhaps even speculative, defining a country as a small country based on the criterion of its self-identification can reveal a lot about its foreign policy patterns (even if by objective parameters - population, GDP, territory, military power - it may not fully meet all the criteria of small states). Given that the main object of our study is Austria, a state that we assume to be an atypical example of small countries, it would be premature to write off such a constructivist approach to the definition of small countries. Thus, it can be concluded that scholars have not reached a consensus on the unique characteristics that states must possess in order to be considered small states.
In addition to the above, several other characteristics of small countries that have been described earlier in the academic literature should be described. Katzenstein (1985) argues that Small States are active participants in the international economy but cannot directly control it and therefore can only adapt to its changes through domestic reforms. Furthermore, it is argued that the behavioural strategies of small states in the international economy do not fit under liberalism and etatism, but rather belong to corporatism, which makes them different from middle and large powers. This economic strategy influences political behaviour, for example by making small states resign to change and adapt to innovations rather than seeking exports, capacity-building and minimizing production costs. Often, small states engage in economic activities that can help to reduce trade deficits caused by the narrow capacity of their domestic markets.
Katzenstein (1985)41 also argues that small European states are characterized by corporatism, which is a response to international tensions and pressures. Corporatism represents political stability and the consequent impossibility of abrupt and fatal policy change. Corporatism encourages flexibility and adaptability, and binds society to the state and makes them cohesive.
Due to the increased interest in small states after World War II, which can be explained by a lack of understanding of how small and weak in terms of power states survived during such a struggle, the number of works and theories about their behavior has increased markedly. One of the most interesting and comprehensive among them is “Shelter theory” by Thorhallsson (2018)  28. At the center of this theory is the idea that the built-in structural weaknesses of Small States cause them to follow a different logic in their behavior to achieve goals than their larger counterparts. Due to their structural characteristics and incompleteness, small states may face a number of challenges, divided by Thorhallsson into three mutually related areas, namely: reducing the risks of potential problems before they occur, helping to overcome problems, and recovering as quickly as possible if a problem has already occurred. A largely logical way for small states to behave in order to achieve their goals is to seek refuge in these areas from more powerful states and/or international organizations. 
The desire for political shelter is explained by the frequent inability of the population of small states to secure a thriving economy, and hence military capabilities (limitations in forces, research and development, expands on maintaining military capabilities, and limited potential to buffer against threats) as well as mechanisms to promote their views at the interstate level, making them potentially vulnerable to coercion by other actors. Therefore, they often need military, administrative and slightly less diplomatic support from other states and/or international organizations, as well as assistance that also takes the form of rules of law which regulates behavior of greater actors slightly to equalize different states. In the case of political asylum from larger players on the world stage, small states often face a “subordinate” position, but asylum allows even neutral states to rely on great powers to maintain world order through norms and rules and to lobby for their interests. There are examples of small states taking refuge from each other and, as a consequence, forming stronger united federations that are ready to demonstrate their will to the rest of the world (example from the past - Germany, possible example from the future - further political integration of the European Union (Thorhallson, 2018)28. But it is not only small states that benefit from political cooperation. Such asymmetric alliances are quite stable because cooperation allows large members to contain the potential expansion/joining of small states into large federations or alliances, and hence the emergence of a new rather influential actor on the world stage. Some small states also use neutrality as a kind of “safe haven” because it allows them to maximize the costs that another state would spend to invade their territory (a particularly common practice among European states whose location avoids conflicts outside the European Union and also provides support in case of invasion. For example, Austria, Sweden and Finland before joining NATO, Malta, Switzerland).
Economic shelter grows out of the fairly frequent weakness of the economy in small states, and hence increased vulnerability to fluctuations in world markets. The economic aspect implies the creation of closer economic ties and economic assistance, such as soft loans in times of crises. In this way, economic shelter help small states to build up internal and external reserves to minimize negative situations and their consequences. Moreover, some small states are specialized on certain spheres of production, for example, Iceland prioritizes maritime and aluminium exports (Davranova, 2024). International organizations such as the GATT/WTO, as well as the agreement on trade and common economic zones are exactly the “shelter” as they liberalize trade and provide easier access to world markets. During the 2008 global economic crisis, cooperation between Ireland and the European Union allowed the country to receive aid more quickly than non-union neighboring Iceland (Thorhallsson and Kirby, 2012).
Societal shelter is no less important for small states. Small populations and therefore economies cannot always allow states to spend large sums on researching technologies and other ideas, which can lead to stagnation and lack of development, which is unacceptable in today's world. The theory of shelter fairly fully describes the behavior of small states on the world stage, emphasizing the special position of small states in comparison with large ones thereby removing the omissions that existed earlier in the works of other scholars who have studied small states.
According to Murphy (2021), European small states that are looking for political, economic and societal shelters, there is another common pattern: neutrality. Firstly, it is worth to note that the neutrality referred to in the concept of small states discussion and behavior is neutrality from participation in armed conflicts, not ideological neutrality (Radoman, 2021). Also, the concept of neutrality is not new, but can be traced even in the Amarna system and the Melian dialogues (Radoman, 2021)45. Historically, neutrality has been seen as the only way to maintain international stability and security, subject to the evolution of wars into more destructive ones. However, in the modern world the concepts have become more complex, and the author makes a clear distinction between military neutrality - unwillingness to participate in military conflicts and join military alliances (for example, Switzerland), and non-alignment - unwillingness to join military alliances, but the possibility of diplomatic and economic cooperation with them (for example, Austria, Ireland).
With the development of technology and the emergence of new types of warfare and weaponry, neutrality is still relevant and that is why many small states use this status to achieve their goals. Jelena Radoman (2021)45 identifies a list of main reasons for small states to become neutral. Among them are the need to ensure security by choosing conflicts for survival; the recognition of neutral states by international law and the possibility of legitimately expressing their opinion in world conflicts; as well as the geographical location of countries (Austria and its balancing act during the Cold War between the USSR and the West) and the possibility of economic benefits from not joining any of the alliances. Neutrality is also already a historical tradition for some European states, in Switzerland and Austria it is already an integral part of national identity. However, modern neutrality differs from historical neutrality and assumes a hybrid form of neutrality, which may combine neutrality and participation, for example, in UN peacekeeping operations but without the use of military force and cooperation with the European Union on international security issues, but such cooperation may serve as a potential catalyst for abandoning neutrality (the case of Finland and Sweden joining NATO).
The change in the very essence of neutrality makes it necessary to think about other reasons for neutral states to join alliances. In addition to diplomatic pressure from international organizations and major powers to engage in alliances, the erosion of traditional 20th century security threats and the emergence of cyber attacks and terrorism, as well as economic and technological benefits from, cooperation are provoking small states to engage in dialogue with alliances (Murphy, 2021)44. New challenges to international security open up opportunities for a new kind of cooperation between small states and alliances. For example, through peacekeeping operations, like Austria in UNDOF missions, MINURCAT or participation in exercises in the most appropriate sectors (Switzerland participates in NATO cyber exercises). 
It is to be assumed that the possibility of expression among equals is also an attraction for small States and encourages them to join associations. In addition, some international unions have “internal groupings” of small States.
In the context of all of the above, it should be separately emphasized that Europe is in many ways an advanced region, so it is important to trace the differences between small states themselves and their behavior in Europe as well as in other parts of the world. In the economic sphere, European small states are more developed (in terms of GDP per capita) and, due to their geographical location, are closer to most economically strong countries. They are more stable in their form of government and also have a fairly stable status on the world stage through membership in or cooperation with international organizations (cooperation or NATO membership) (Baldacchino and Wivel, 2020).
However, does the stability of European small states provide any special features? The European Union offers Member States an excellent forum for negotiations on various issues. Therefore, small states can easily compensate for any lack of resources by taking an active diplomatic stance on specific issues, for example, by participating in EU Council working groups where decisions are taken by consensus or by engaging with the European Commission and the European Parliament. An equally important distinguishing feature of small EU member states is the possibility of presiding over the EU Council and the possibility to promote national interests more easily (Micallef Grimaud, 2018)27.
Membership in the European Union also allows small states to promote their interests among larger allies because of the common European legal norms to which they can appeal (Panke, 2010). “In lobbying the Commission, the Presidency and the European Parliament, states seek to influence EU policies according to their interests through persuasion in providing normative or scientific reasons” - Panke, (2010)47. EU membership also provides an opportunity for “internal” alliances to work on specific issues, such as security or financial coordination which also increases the influence of small states on the European Union.

1.2. Conceptualizing Austria a small state
Starting with the physical criteria for determining the size of a state, it should be noted that Vital (1967)29 defines a state as small if its population reaches only 10-15 million people if the country is developed and 20-30 if it is undeveloped. In the case of Austria, we consider the first option and can certainly refer to Austria with its approximately 9.2 million inhabitants as of February 2025 as a small state. However, if we look at the composition of the European Union, it would seem that Austria is more of a medium-sized association country, as its population is much larger than Slovenia (just over 2 million), Cyprus, Malta and Luxembourg, which have populations of even less than 1 million. At the same time, Austria is far behind Germany, France, Spain and Italy, which are also members of the European Union and have populations of 45 million or more. Thus, with a certain amount of convention (realizing that this is a relative criterion) we can classify Austria as a small state rather than a large state in terms of population size. And since the size of population directly affects the political weight of a state in the EU bodies and structures (this criterion determines the share of votes of a member state in a weighted qualified majority vote in the Council or the number of seats in the European Parliament), Austria can be characterized as a relatively influential small state (see Table 1).
Table 1
Selective sample of EU countries compiled by the author
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/infographic/meps-seats/index_en.html; https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=EU; https://epthinktank.eu/2014/12/09/changed-rules-for-qualified-majority-voting-in-the-council-of-the-eu/
If we look at the European region in terms of the power factor, in the 20th century power played a significant role in determining a state's potential as well as its weight in the international arena. in the article “Lilliputians in Gulliver’s World? Small States in International Relations” by Neumann and Gstöhl (2004) tells that there were a total of 6 great powers in Europe, which included Austria, but within the now defunct state of Austria-Hungary. Thus, on the one hand it is reasonable to assume that after the collapse of the empire, Austria alone no longer had the power it once had as part of the union. Whether the legacy of imperialism is present in contemporary Austrian foreign policy is a great debate. Nevertheless, in recent years, left-wing and extreme left-wing political forces (modern communist movements in Europe), have propagated the view that modern Austrian imperialism is more economic in nature. Such facts as the role of Austrian banks in the restoration of capitalism in the countries of Eastern and Southeastern Europe after the collapse of the USSR (it is believed that such countries as the Czech Republic, Croatia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Romania were the “backyard” of the Habsburg Empire), Austria's role in the economies of these countries in particular, in the financial, energy, agricultural, telecommunication, construction sectors of the economy, and in the manufacturing industry are cited as arguments (Zenker, 2024). 
Austria's political neutrality in this respect is seen as a factor that gave it a competitive advantage by allowing it to establish and build significantly weighty ties with socialist economies back in the Cold War era. At the same time, these political forces are actively pushing the view that Austria's current political neutrality is no more than a fiction, since Austrian military forces are active participants in the “Partnership for peace” program, Zenker (2024) also notes that Austria is a transit point for NATO troops and weapons, which can be seen as a partial retreat from the policy of neutrality. The influence of an increasingly militarizing Germany and the EU on Austria's foreign policy behavior has also been noted. To what extent this view correlates with Austria's foreign policy patterns in the ODA, we will have to find out in the following chapters. If this view is at least partially confirmed, then it is appropriate to characterize Austria as a very atypical example of a small state, or rather as a state that mimics a “small” state, while using the competitive advantages of small states to realize its foreign policy ambitions that are not typical of small countries. 
Regarding other parameters of small states, the historical events of the 20th century led to the emergence of two superpowers, the USSR and the USA, against the background of which all other states, including Austria, no longer have such possibilities to impose their will on others, and therefore do not have much power on the world stage. Furthermore, according to this categorization we confirm that the definition of small states by Neumann and De Carvalho (2015) and Morgenthau (1972) from paragraph 1.1 applies to Austria and it does not have the status of a super, great or medium power. Thus, according to the residual definition (according to Neumann and Gstöhl (2004)48) Austria is a small state.
 Austria's economy is clearly export-oriented, reflecting its high dependence on foreign trade. Foreign trade accounts for 117% of the country's gross domestic product (GDP), which is significantly higher than the global average. Such a high percentage indicates that Austria is highly dependent on demand for its goods and services outside the country. Exports play a key role in maintaining the stability and development of the Austrian economy, as well as in providing jobs and supporting the growth of the national industry.
The main goods that Austria exports are cars and vehicles. This category accounts for 37.5% of total exports in 2023, making it the most important part of Austrian foreign trade
Table 2
Austrian exports 2023

Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: https://www.statistik.at/fileadmin/announcement/2024/03/20240308Aussenhandel2023EN.pdf
It includes a wide range of products, from various equipment and vehicles to machinery for various industries such as metallurgy, chemical industry, and electronics manufacturing. These products are actively used in various sectors of the economy, both inside and outside Europe.
In addition to machinery and vehicles, most of the exports are manufactured goods. Together, they account for 57,1% of the total volume of exported goods. The most important categories in this group are chemical products, which in 2023 amounted to 34.55 billion euros, showing an increase of 18.8% compared to the previous year. This is primarily due to the increased demand for chemical components used in pharmaceutical, agricultural, and other industries. The next major category is other manufactured goods (miscellaneous manufactured articles), such as products with high added value (for example, technologies and components for mechanical engineering), which amount to 19.85 billion euros, but showed a slight decrease of 2.3% compared to the previous year. Manufactured goods such as machine tools, equipment, and other industrial goods amount to 39.24 billion euros, but their exports decreased by 8.3% in 2023, due to certain economic difficulties and changes in global markets51.
Geographically, Austria has a clear orientation towards Europe. Germany is Austria's largest trading partner. Austria accounts for the largest share of its exports - for example, 29,2% in 202351. This is due to the close integration of the Austrian and German economies, where Austrian industry is actively involved in German production chains. There are a large number of joint ventures, and Austria is an important supplier of semi-finished products used in German production processes. This is especially noticeable in industries such as mechanical engineering and the chemical industry, where Austrian companies are often part of German ones. production and commodity chains. The changes in the German economy have a direct impact on Austria, as many Austrian enterprises depend on the demand and conditions prevailing in German industry.
After Germany, the United States ranks second among export partners, accounting for 7.4% of all Austrian exports51. The United States, despite its geographical remoteness, is an important market for high-tech products machinery and vehicles, as well as chemical industry goods. They are followed by Italy and Switzerland, which occupy 6.2% and 5%, respectively, in the structure of Austrian exports51. These countries are also playing an important role in the Austrian economy due to its geographical proximity and similar production traditions. Italy, as one of the largest manufacturers in Europe, needs Austrian components for its machines and mechanisms, and Switzerland, a country known for its developed chemical and pharmaceutical industries, is an important partner of Austria in the field of chemical production. Another important fact is that the European Union is the main market for Austrian goods, which account for 68.4% of all Austrian exports51. Moreover, in terms of import, Germany also ranks first among Austria’s partners. This highlights the importance of the internal European market for Austria, which ensures its stability in the global economy and compensation for the structural limitedness of a small state. European countries, as neighbors, have close economic ties with Austria, which leads to mutual dependence and strategic orientation towards cooperation within the EU. Austria's position and strong proximity to Germany suggests that its behaviour on the world stage may be influenced by its alliances, mostly with Germany.
Membership of international organizations also allows Austria to compensate for its disadvantages through, for example, unimpeded market access. Moreover, the concept of “small state” is also found in practical terms. For example, there are informal groupings of small states in international organizations (see Table 3). Of these groupings, Austria is a member of the UN forum of small states, which allows us to classify it as a small state not only on the basis of the parameters of small states identified from the definitions above, but also on the basis of the actual situation in the international arena.
Table 3
Small states’ groupings in International Organizations
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of Corbett, J. et al (2021)
Membership in international organizations also provides Austria an influence on the global economy and politics. Despite its relatively small size and limited resources, Austria, thanks to its participation in these international structures, can actively participate in making key global decisions. This allows it to be a significant player in the international arena, despite the fact that its size is significantly inferior to the major powers of the block. Participation in international organizations helps Austria strengthen its position on the global political and economic scene.
The policy of neutrality that Austria has followed since the signing of the Austrian State Treaty in 1955 and is an important factor in determining Austrian policy. there is a view that Austria skilfully uses its neutral position and non-alignment with any of the opposing sides in conflicts, making it an ideal negotiation platform and mediator between East and West, for example (Shvejcer, 2022). Austria's neutrality differs considerably from that of its neighbours Sweden and Finland. From the very beginning, its necessity was marked by the restoration of independence and statehood, as well as the avoidance of a sense of integration with Germany and the violation of the provisions of the State Treaty (Basov, 2019). The country has refused to participate in military alliances such as NATO and has largely ruled out its involvement in international military conflicts. Such a provision on neutrality can be interpreted as a desire of a small state to remain autonomous (in this case, not to fall under the dependence of Germany), but also to receive shelters according to Thorhallsson's theory from Germany.
Austria is characterized by a strong and stable system of corporatism, which, as discussed in paragraph 1.1, is characteristic of small states. Corporatism in Austria is expressed in a well-developed system of interaction between employees, employers and the state. This system helps to regulate socio-economic policy and maintain social and economic stability in the country. Corporatism allows to make flexible and adaptive decisions that satisfy the majority of stakeholders and compensate for the historical disadvantages associated with size as well as helps to reach compromises and create effective solutions that promote social peace and economic development and to regulate working conditions and protect the rights of employees, which is especially important for maintaining social harmony (Bussjäger, Johler 2020). In general, corporatism in Austria plays a key role in ensuring internal stability, which is an important aspect for small states that need to effectively manage their limited resources. This interaction system helps to balance the interests of different groups and contribute to the sustainable development of society, which is especially important in the context of globalization and rapid changes in world markets.
To conclude, on the one hand, Austria quite clearly fits such criteria of small states as population size, export-oriented economy, corporatism, formal political neutrality, small military power of the state, self-identification of the country as a small state (both in terms of participation in small states groupings in the UN and in terms of positioning of this country in the works of its IR scholars, which was noted in the introduction to the paper). On the other hand, Austria is a special case in the context of all small states because of its rather large foreign economic appetites, which may contain echoes of the country's historical imperialism and the sometimes conditional nature of its political and military neutrality. 

1.3. Foreign policy-making in Austria: institutional and political aspects.
The behaviour of a state on the world stage depends primarily on its foreign policy and those factors that influence its implementation. It is worth noting that the formation of foreign policy is influenced by the political system of the state, its administrative division, international obligations, as well as the historical background. In the Austrian context, some constitutional and legal constraints on the conduct of foreign policy can also be identified, among them the constitutional basis for neutrality enshrined in the Federal Constitutional Act of 1955 and the Vienna State Treaty together with other constitutional provisions (Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, 2023)4.
Neutrality has an important influence on the conduct of Austrian foreign policy. From the very beginning of Austrian neutrality, it can be divided into 4 stages of influence on the affairs of the state. The first stage - from 1955 to 1970 the stage of formation and consolidation and joining the UN and other international organizations. In case of accession to the UN, collective defense obligations are imposed on states, but the status of neutrality had a direct impact by making it impossible to apply this provision to Austria. The “Verdross Doctrine” allowed Austria to place neutrality above allied obligations thereby determining the direction of the state's foreign policy as part of the UN (Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, 2023)4.
According to (Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, 2023)4 from 1970 to 1985, Austria's neutrality enabled it to strengthen its position on the world stage by pursuing a foreign policy of openness and mediation to resolve conflicts together with an active involvement in international organization and further European integration. 
The next stage of the perception of Austrian neutrality can be called “reorientation” in 1985 - mid-2000s. Other political forces came to power in the country, which significantly reduced the ideological influence of the SPÖ (here and after the Social Democratic Party of Austria or SDP). The influence of the ÖVP (here and after Austrian People's Party or APP) conservatives increased to a great extent.
Into this phase after tensions in the far east and economic sanctions against Hussein, Austria abandoned the “Verdoss doctrine” adopted in the first phase and switched to ‘differential neutrality’. This allowed Austria to pursue a more active foreign policy after joining the EU in 1995, for example by committing to the Common Foreign and Security Policy (GFSP) (Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, 2023)4. The changed neutrality led Austria to cooperate with NATO “Partnership for Peace”. According to Prutsch (2006) a greater partnership with NATO for security purposes was required thus significantly changing the previously existing foreign policy trajectory.
From the end of the third phase to the present day, Austrian neutrality has been in a period of “stagnation”. One of Austria's main political parties APP did not even include a commitment to neutrality in its 2015 election campaign. Progressive European integration and Austria's increasingly strong entry into European institutions is leading to a depoliticized neutrality that allows for a new foreign policy. For example, Austria, as part of the European Union, is obliged to help other countries in case of attack but is free to choose the methods on its own (Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, 2023)4.
Austria is first and foremost an active player on the world stage. It is home to the headquarters of many international organizations, such as the UN headquarters in Vienna, the headquarters of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the headquarters of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and others. 
According to the Austrian federal constitution, article 65, paragraph 1 B-VG, the federal president is responsible for representing Austria in foreign policy, appointing representatives abroad and signing international documents, but the development of foreign policy is largely the responsibility of the federal government and ministry of foreign affairs. However, according to Kloss and Rohan (2017) this is contrary to the Federal Ministries Act, the determination of Austrian foreign policy is the responsibility of the federal government as a whole and the foreign minister in particular. If we go deeper into the institutional structure of Austria, it can be noted that the Federal President is a person of the State, but can independently, without coordination with the Federal Government, sign only those international acts that will not have international legal consequences for the State, which leads to the conclusion about the duality of the position of the Federal President in Austria (Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, 2023)4.
The Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale Angelegenheiten (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) plays an important role in Austria's foreign policy. According to the constitution of the Republic of Austria and federal laws, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for the preparation and implementation of international agreements, the coordination of Austrian policies within the European Union, the representation of Austria in the UN and the EU, the coordination of international development policy, and the representation of Austria abroad through consulates and embassies.
Looking at the Austrian President's office, it has rather modest resources, only about 70 people in the presidential office, and often involves representatives of the federal government during foreign trips and important foreign (Posch, 2016). It is worth noting that foreign policy in Austria is the responsibility of two bodies that are in a nexus, namely the federal president and the federal government (may be represented by the federal chancellor and/or vice-chancellor). As noted by Senn, Eder, & Kornprobst, (2023)4, the constitutional responsibilities of the president and the federal government may allow for some ambiguity and freedom of interpretation, so-called “grey areas”.
As was shown in the example of the evolution of neutrality, the implementation of foreign policy can be greatly influenced by the party composition of a government in a given term. After the 2019 elections, the Austrian parliament consisted of representatives of the 5 main parties, namely 34,55% belonged to Austrian People's Party. Social Democratic Party of Austria took 23,89%; Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs (here and after Freedom Party of Austria or FPA) - 17,20%; Die Grünen (here and after the Greens) had 14,08%, and NEOS (here and after the New Austria and Liberal Forum or NALF) took 8,44%.
Since 2017 (since Sebastian Kurz), the position of federal chancellor has consistently been held by the APP (and usually, but not always, the chancellor is the leader of the party with the most seats in parliament, since the chancellor is constitutionally appointed by the federal president, but with the approval and support of the majority of the national council). The party adheres to traditional conservative values, prioritizes European integration, free market economy, Christian democratic values and a tough migration59. Logically, these ideological postulates play an important role in the decision-making of the federal chancellor and largely determine the direction of foreign policy.
However, in the Austrian parliamentary elections held in August 2024, the political landscape has changed as the APP has been gradually losing influence over the past years and has ceded its leadership in parliament. After the 2024 elections, the parliamentary seats are distributed as follows: 25.36% for FPA; 24.52% belonging to APP; 23,22% - SDP; The Greens got 11,08%; NALF 11,14% and new compared to the previous election, the KPÖ (Communist Party of Austria) has gained 2,96%. 
After the election victory of the SDP, the APP and its leader Karl Nehammer, who has been Chancellor of Austria since 2021, planned negotiations to form a new coalition government, which, however, failed and led to the resignation of the Chancellor in January 2025.
It is clear that the composition of the parliament has changed during the last term, which may foreshadow changes in the forces influencing the formulation of foreign policy. The Austrian People’s Party lost almost 10 percent of seats, which is significant. Perhaps with the change of forces in 2024, the Austrian foreign policy course, possibly, will get a new breath with a bias towards social-democratic values. 

Chapter 2
2.1. International development aid as a phenomenon in international relations: origins, effectiveness assessments and donor motives.
International development assistance can be explained in different ways. For example, Cracknell (1996) describes it as spent of public money out of state in another part of the world. Sen (2018) describes international development aid policy a foreign policy tool, generally speaking it is the most comprehensive definition. However, as the basic definition will be used, the official definition of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) (the body responsible for cooperation with developing countries) explains the phenomenon of international development assistance as foreign aid in the form of financial flows from a donor country to a recipient country (Tarp, 2006). These efforts are aimed at “inclusive and sustainable economic development, the advancement of equalities within and among countries, poverty eradication, improvement of living standards in developing countries, and to a future in which no country will depend on aid” - the Mandate of Development Assistance Committee 2024.
Delving into the history of the phenomenon of international development assistance, according to Williams (2013), it institutionally appeared not so long ago, approximately after World War II, but has already managed to become an important part of international relations. Little and Clifford (1965)22 assume that the British Colonies Development Act of 1929 implied the transfer of money to developing colonies for their modernization. Roosevelt's “good-neighbor policy” in the 1930s, expressed in preferential loans to neighboring developing countries, influenced the US political position and strengthened its position on the world stage. After WWII, the US was the largest donor of international development assistance (Williams, 2013)67.
Using the example of the Marshall Plan of 1948, it is clear that by providing development aid for the reconstruction of other countries, the US could partly use aid as an instrument of geopolitical influence in pursuit of one of its goals according to Williams (2013)67. In Harry Truman's speech (Truman, 1947) known as the Truman Doctrine, he makes it clear that the US will use financial aid as a measure to counter its Cold War adversaries. 
The second reason, also according to Williams (2013)67, was the desire of the USA to increase its economic advantage by developing a liberal, dynamic international economy, which simply required the post-war rise of other nations. The will of a prosperous international economy led to the creation of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, now called the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, in 1944.
The 50-60s of the 20th century were characterized by the creation of a number of important institutions that played an important role in the development of international development assistance. Among them were the International Cooperation Administration (ICA) in 1954, the Development Loan Fund (DLF) in 1957, and most importantly USAID (1961), which united the above-mentioned programs. USAID is responsible for supporting economic, democracy, and social and humanitarian development programs around the world. 
The Cold War could be traced even within the framework of international development assistance, the USSR, in parallel with the USA, was pursuing its own program of assistance to other countries in order to help them to develop their own development programs (Guan-Fu 1983). This can be seen as a confirmation of the view that development aid in history has been mostly in the nature of geopolitical gain.
Almost from the beginning of its existence, the United Nations has included such bodies as the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the United Nations Special Fund, both of which were aimed at promoting international development. In 1966, the two bodies were merged into one under the name The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Within Europe in the second half of the 20th century, international development assistance also became institutionalized. The Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC), which is now the OECD was created. Its main purpose was to oversee US reconstruction aid under the Marshall Plan. 
Despite the evident dominance of the US in international development aid, over time the European Union, having built capacity and recovered from wars, has become the largest donor of international aid. In 2006, for example, the EU spent $58.9 billion on aid to other countries, while the US spent only $22.7 billion (Carbone, 2007)23.
The European Union as an actor of international development assistance has a special nature. It combines two aspects: it is a bilateral donor, acting through the European Commission, but at the same time, the EU is a body of autonomous development assistance from member states (Carbone, 2017).
With regard to the history and institutionalization of EU development assistance policy, it is important to note the following the history of European development assistance can be traced back to the Treaty of Rome in 1957. The member states created the European Development Fund and in parallel continued bilateral aid to their colonies, established relations between the EU and the African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States (ACP). Mostly, relations were established for supply needs and to open colonial markets for further trade, but, at the same time, partly motivated by a sense of responsibility for the colonial past. Initial actions have been confirmed over time with the emergence of agreements such as The Yaoundé Convention in 1963, Lomé in 1975 (Carbone, 2017)69.  
Delving deeper into the specifics of the second aspect, the 1957 Treaty of Rome introduced a supranational field of development policy in the EU, but the successor states perceived this as a threat to sovereignty and rejected the proposal for various reasons, such as the fear of losing the status quo, or in accordance with Euroscepticism (Carbone, 2017)69. 
The Maastricht Treaty of 1992 innovated the controversy over the level of coherence of international development assistance policies. It introduced the principle of coherence in relations, according to which the EU member states were to pursue a coordinated policy of relations with third countries, including development assistance policies. The international challenges of the early 21st century led to a significant increase in international development assistance from the European Union. In addition, poverty alleviation was declared one of the objectives of the EU's development policy and EuropeAid, responsible for international development assistance, was created. This reform gradually gave states more confidence in the Commission's actions (Carbone, 2017)69. Implementation of Cotonou Partnership Agreement 2000 proposes new principles of aid provision (needs+performance) and partially changes the focus on good governance, peace and security and migration.
The new institutions, namely the European External Action Service (EEAS) and the Director General for International Cooperation and Development (DG DEVCO), have taken the importance of development policy to a new level by placing poverty eradication and the promotion of sustainable development among the overall objectives of the EU (Carbone, 2017)69. In addition to these institutions in the EU (run by the European Commission), the European External Action Service is also involved in international development assistance policy, whose main task is to coordinate development assistance with more comprehensive EU external policies (Orbie 2020).
As for the motives that drive donor countries to provide aid to other states, one of them, as illustrated by the example of the United States after World War II, is to strengthen its position on the world stage. Firstly, donors often expect recipient countries to support the interests of the countries giving them aid. Second, the desire to increase global prosperity and reduce poverty may also be motivations for international development assistance. Third, the economic interests of donors may be boosted by the development of new actors in the global economy (Dudley and Montmarquette, 1976).
Brown (2017) argues that donors are motivated by self-interest and use aid as a means to achieve foreign policy goals. However, it is also argued that in some cases ODA may be an ‘apology’ for, for example, colonial exploitation or other inequalities and injustices in the past.
Orbie (2020)70 offers additional donor motivations for consideration: for example, for the EU, the motivator is the prospect of controlling migration, which in turn is a guarantee of security and stability. 
According to Orbie (2020)70, the effectiveness of international development assistance is important to the EU and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005) enshrined five fundamental points to which development assistance should adhere, namely ownership, harmonization (avoiding duplication), alignment , accountability and Managing for results (focus on results, not volume). However, this system has encountered unforeseen obstacles in the form of the phenomenon of “efficiency fatigue”, where mutual benefit, rather than the principle of efficiency gains, has become the primary focus of aid budgets and programs (Orbie 2020)70.

2.2. The Institutional Framework of Austrian development policy 
Austria, as an active participant in international sustainable development initiatives, plays a significant role in the global Official Development Assistance. In Austria there are several main institutions for implementing the aid strategy, such as OEZA, Austrian Development Agency and Austrian Development Bank. 
Firstly, OEZA (Österreichische Entwicklungszusammenarbeit; Austrian Development Cooperation) is a system of state aid aimed at reducing and subsequently eliminating the gap between wealth and poverty. It can be said that OEZA is one of the longest-standing mechanisms, as the aid initiative emerged in the 70s after Austria joined the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). OEZA works under the direction of the Austrian Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs (BMEIA). The main institutions through which OEZA is functioning are Austrian Development Agency and Austrian Development Bank. 
Secondly, the Austrian Development Agency (ADA), the executive body of OEZA, has been operating since 2004 (Development Cooperation Act (EZA-G 2002)) as a limited liability company (GmbH) and is wholly owned by the Republic of Austria. The main purpose of ADA is to plan, finance and support development programs and projects in Africa, Asia, Southeast and Eastern Europe. For the ADA according to the organization's official website, there are three major issues that need to be addressed quickly. These are peace building, protection of the environment and nature, and poverty alleviation. 
ADA works in close cooperation with the European Union institutions and other international organizations to make multilateral development aid more comprehensive. Together with the Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs and other organizations interested in international development aid, the ADA aims to promote sustainable development for the benefit of people around the world.  Where do the funds come from? Initially, the Austrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs provides the funds, but in addition to it, other federal ministries also fund ADA projects. Most of the funding also comes from private initiatives (to be discussed later in the text).
The Austrian Development Bank was established in 2008 to finance private investment projects under the OEZA. It finances projects that are “economically viable and make sense from a development policy perspective and thus contribute to the strengthening of the private sector”. The Austrian Development Bank plays a special role in the selection of projects for financing by the Austrian Development Bank to ensure that the financed projects have a positive environmental impact and are in line with sustainable development goals. The main difference between a development bank and conventional banks is that it provides financing under conditions that resemble market conditions, but it is not afraid of risks like conventional banks. In addition, a development bank is primarily a private company, but it operates under a state mandate76.
While talking about the Austrian development bank, it is important to mention the latest academic findings in thinking about the role of development banks in Europe. Timing here is not accidental. In particular, Mertens and Tiemann, (2017) argue that the global economic crisis of 2008 forced state-owned development banks to become an important part of the restructuring of the European economy, and with the J.-K. Juncker taking the post of President of the European Commission, the development of investment plans for such banks (primarily for the European Investment Bank) became a full-fledged attempt to bolster economic recovery in the EU. Having as their main mission the promotion of pre-defined socio-economic goals, state-owned development banks may provide venture capital to circumvent strict EU rules on subsidizing the economy. Thus, Block (2008), who studied similar processes in the USA, wrote about “developmental networks states”, and Mazzucato (2015) - about “entrepreneurial states”.
In this empirical analysis special attention is paid to the budgetary framework of Austrian development aid policy. Based on ADA reports, a database that includes the following parameters was compiled: that the Austrian ODA is divided into two channels - bilateral and multilateral. Bilateral includes such aspects of expenditures as Budget support; Core contributions, funding and pooled funds; Projects and project-type interventions; Experts and other technical assistance; Scholarships and training in donor country; Debt relief, Administrative costs; Bilateral loans and equity investments and Other in-donor expenditures, which in turn are divided into Development awareness and Asylum seeker in donor countries. multilateral channels in turn include cooperation with the UN; EU; IBRD/IDA; regional development banks and other organizations. 
Below is a graph 1 showing the distribution of Austrian international development assistance from 2014 to 2020 in two areas: bilateral channels and multilateral channels. As can be seen from the graph, Austria's ODA expenditures remained at approximately the same level throughout the whole period under review - around 1000 mln euros. This figure is gradually increasing in 2020, net disbursements grew by 20.1% compared to 2014.  The exception was 2016, when disbursements peaked at 1478.9 mln euro. This is due to the fact that during this period there was a migration crisis which Austria was prone to. For example, because in 2015 and 2016 the number of migrants significantly prevailed over the normal average indicator which is about 140-150 thousand people per year; in 2015 and 2016 this indicator reached 214410 and 174310 respectively. The crisis provoked major policy changes (“Austrian U-turn'” fence, the closure of the Balkan corridor). Which provoked budgetary redistribution especially under Asylum seeker in donor countries.


Chart 1
Net disbursement of Austrian ODA, mln euro  
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (Date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
It can also be seen from chart 1 that Parameters of bilateral aid channels are significantly higher than the average for the study period in 2015 and 2016. This can be explained by increased domestic spending on refugee support. In 2016, there was the highest bilateral aid of €891.9 million for the period under review, but already in 2017 it fell sharply to €532.6 million. Thus, two trends can be concluded - spending on bilateral ODA fell significantly after the migration crisis and became even lower than it was before, while spending on multilateral ODA continues to grow. It can be a sign of the priority prevailing of burden-sharing with allies in the goal-setting of the Austrian ODA over their own foreign policy ambitions. Certainly, this does not contradict the fact that Austria's national interests may well be embedded in the multilateral ODA channels, but it seems that in the post-crisis years Austria considered the multilateral ODA channels more important and effective than the bilateral channels implemented alone. 
Table 4 illustrates the changes in the sources of funding for Austrian international development assistance. It can be concluded that the Federal Ministry of Interior (FMI) spent €252 million and €324.7 million respectively in 2015-2016, which is significantly more than in the other years under study. This is further evidence that the surge in spending in the Austrian ODA was related to the 2015 migration crisis in Europe. 
Table 4
Sources of funding for Austrian bilateral ODA 2014-2020
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
Thus, the strong influence of the 2015 migration crisis on development assistance policies is evident.  Usually, when examining ODA in the context of the migration crisis, researchers focus on the changing geographical priorities of ODA or its content. For example, Shriwise and Bruzelius (2017) shows that the migration crisis is practically changing the traditional framework of “developed countries helping developing countries” for international development assistance, as in 2015-2016 a large amount of funds is directed inward, countries spend them on themselves to cover the costs of refugees, which leads to a redistribution of budgets. Between 2014 and 2015, such aid increased by 27%, while aid to developing countries as a whole declined by almost 4%. 
Ugolor and Atakpu (2018) investigate the topic of how ODA is integrated into the context of migration policy objectives, how it contributes to curbing migration flows from disadvantaged countries and addressing the causes of migration. However, looking at the Austrian ODA from the point of view of its budgets, at least two previously unspoken consequences of the impact of the migration crisis on ODA become apparent: 1) the migration crisis has “crippled” the Austrian ODA in terms of its budget, and 2) it is unexpected that Austria has decided to include domestic refugee costs in its ODA reporting. In Chapter 2.1, we clearly defined the concept of ODA as spending by a donor country on a recipient country. In the case of Austria, there was essentially a substitution of the notion of “recipient country” by citizens of that country who turned out to be asylum seekers on Austrian territory, which corresponds to the described Shriwise and Bruzelius (2017)81 assumption that development policy becomes “people-centered”. Foreign policy interests were decided to be sacrificed in favor of domestic political interests. This pattern of behavior can be considered as a reflection of the logic of “small states” in the implementation of the ODA policy.
From table 4 it is seen that there is a noticeable increase by ADA spending in 2019 and 2020, with the amount increasing from 86,8 in 2014 to 118,3 in 2020. This can be explained by closer cooperation with partners through multilateral aid channels to fight a worldwide pandemic because it's virtually impossible through bilateral channels because the pandemic affected the whole world and was a global problem. It is therefore most likely that multilateral pandemic control channels were seen as more effective (including in terms of cost) than bilateral ones.
The Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy has consistently increased funding for education-related initiatives. Education will be discussed in more detail later in the text, as it is a particularly interesting case study within the ODA framework.
It is noticeable that the contributions of the Federal Ministry of Defense and Sports (FMDS) and since 2018 the Federal Ministry of Defense (FMD) have decreased by 2015 and then almost steadily remained at a low level. A practical explanation for such dynamics can be assumed to be the redistribution of funding as a consequence of the economic and political pressures of the migration crisis and the pandemic. Also, the neutral status of Austria should not be forgotten as an explanation for the initially rather low level of the ministry's participation. Reorganization of the structure of the ministry and the pre-transition period, which fell within the period under study, may also be the reason for such a slippage in funding.
An interesting feature of the Austrian ODA is the participation of provinces and municipalities, which may indicate the decentralization of development policy and its special importance, but domestic affairs do not lose their importance for these institutions, and they provide inconsistent aid with budgets that change from year to year.
Table 5 illustrates spendings of the Austrian international development aid budget through different channels. The most stable areas of expenditure in the Austrian state budget from 2014 to 2020 are projects and project-type interventions and administrative costs, as these are the least volatile and long-term elements. 
Table 5
Spendings of the Austrian ODA 2014-2020
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 	
	First, the attention is drawn to Budget support, which reached 0 in 2018 and has not returned to its original level of 5.5 in 2014-2015. Perhaps the development of international aid and the general trend in favor of multilateral aid initiatives had an impact on this line of expenditures. With regard to experts and other technical assistance, there is a significant decrease in funding from 40.9 to 22.5 over the study period. This may indicate a reduction in human resource assistance to other countries due to the need for their presence in the country and possibly with the development of technology and online connections.
The most unequal spending is debt relief, namely the cancellation of a country's debts in partial or full format in case they cannot be compensated without fatal consequences. It is very difficult to assume a specific reason for such fluctuations, but again global challenges and regional and strategic preferences of Austria play a role here. However, such sharp fluctuation in conjunction with other challenges to developing countries, in 2020 DAC had reached an agreement on a started at the 2014 High Level Meeting modernization of ODA measurement system and particularly the question of debt relief. The new rules aim to preserve the integrity of the ODA while facilitating the realization of debt relief for all participants in the process by setting clear limits on the amount of debt that can be forgiven (Rawdanowicz et al., 2021).
In general, it can be assumed that by 2020, Austria has adopted a more pragmatic aid policy, as evidenced by Bilateral loans and equity investments, which have increased more than 5-times over this period, suggesting an Austrian preference to gradually move away from grant aid in favour of investment cooperation. The table also shows a noticeable drop in bilateral grants and other in-donor expenditures since 2016, but this expenditure item requires a more complete review and will be described later in the text.
The most important channel as it is seen from the chart 2, in terms of money spent by bilateral ODA is bilateral grants, on average, they account for about 97 per cent of total bilateral aid. Firstly, “bilateral” means that aid is coming directly from an official (government) source to the recipient without transition through special institutions. Bilateral grants refer to a situation where sums of money are provided to a developing country gratuitously or on an interest-free basis.

Chart 2
Bilateral grants in the net disbursement of bilateral Austrian ODA per channel, mln euro
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
A distinctive feature of the grants mechanism is that there is no increase in the debt of the reviewer country, unlike other mechanisms of international development assistance, grants are provided on a non-repayable basis, but with transparent and careful reporting requirements. Grants are most often seen in humanitarian aid and other social areas such as health or education.
OECD Development Cooperation Peer Reviews: Austria 2020 (2020) stated that the migration crisis mentioned earlier was definitely echoed in the change in the distribution of the Austrian budget. The state spent less than in the previous year 2016, but still almost half of the budget originally allocated for ODA on the education and stay of refugees in Austria. Due to this budget reallocation, Debt Relief has decreased and remains at a low level throughout the remainder of the study period. In 2018 it almost gained the 0 mark.
Other in-donor expenditures (see chart 3) can be characterised as money that does not move abroad as part of international development assistance, but remains in the donor country, yet is linked to international aid (Hynes and Scott, (2013). They account from 8 to 61% of total bilateral ODA from year to year. In Austria it is Development awareness and Asylum seeker in donor countries (see table 4). 

Chart 3
“Other in-donor expenditures” budget line in the net disbursement of bilateral Austrian ODA per channel, mln euro
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
The term “Development awareness” in Austrian official political discourse means allocation of funds that remain in the country and are aimed at mobilizing the participation of the private sector and Austrian domestic institutions in ODA. For example, project “EYD2015: Municipalities as bridges of International assistance and development”, implemented in Austria from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2016 at a total cost of 120 thousand euros aims to develop and strengthen the commitment of both local decision-makers and the private sector to development assistance policies in the field of climate protection, sustainable energy and other related areas. While the project “KUNZWANA 1 - 'return match' in Austria” held in 01.06.2014 - 31.12.2014 aims to contribute to the preservation of the unique cultural identity of Tongan art by raising awareness of this culture among Austrians and by creating networks of exchange between Austrian musicians and Zimbabwean musicians.
According to Table 6, over the study period, expenditures under the item “development awareness” remain almost stable from 2015 to 2020. However, the item “asylum seeker in donor countries” shows significant changes, namely a sharp rise to 539 in 2016 and then a rather sharp decline to 27.1 in 2020. The data further emphasize the impact of the migration crisis on the allocation of Austria's international development assistance budget, namely since 2015 significantly more funds have been allocated to domestic development-related needs. It can be concluded that Austrian development policy is not only outward-looking, but also largely inward-looking - it includes spending on asylum for refugees. is not only outward-looking, but also largely inward-looking - it includes expenditure on asylum for refugees.
Table 6
Net disbursement of “Other in-donor expenditures” budget line in the bilateral Austrian ODA
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
Possible explanation of such changing results of Austrian spendings would be provided further. It is worth mentioning that in 2015 about 85500 applicants for refugee (7% from all European) were registered in Austria. Taking a closer look at the Austrian government's response to the 2015 migration crisis as a whole. As the situation worsened, Austria made the so-called “Austrian U-turn” and set a limit for asylum seekers. Since autumn 2015, Austria has accepted only 80 asylum applications per day, which is certainly low in the context of the crisis (Benkova, 2017). Which suggests that the government's reaction was rather harsh. 
But why did Austria start to introduce anti-migration measures? Initially at the end of August 2015, migrant bodies were found by the authorities near the border in eastern Austria, which could mean a potential start of problems. Later, Hungarian Protestants forced the state to allow them to cross the Austrian border, which caused the start of a rather large illegal flow of migrants, namely about 20,000. However, many of them move to Germany in the following months, forcing Germany to introduce temporary restrictions on border crossings with Austria in order to regulate the flow of migrants in some way. Austria, sharing the burden with Germany, began a similar policy with Hungary in September (Wagner, 2015). I can assume that the boundary situation can contribute to the idea of Austrian policy direction in accordance with burden-sharing ambitions.
In addition, Karolewski and Benedikter, (2018) note that Austria is generally among those EU countries that accept refugees reluctantly and in small numbers in order to comply with EU procedure. However, Austria is geographically located on the route of the largest migration route, the Balkan corridor, which practically makes Austria an important milestone in migration flows. The Austrian government took a number of measures that changed the existing arrangements. At first it was the previously mentioned new laws restricting migration flows, but by the end of the month Austria started building a fence on the Austrian-Slovenian border, which was the beginning of the ‘closure’ of the Balkan corridor. 
The reasons for this can also be found in internal divisions. In 2015, Foreign Minister Sebastian Kurz openly criticized the “open door” policy for migrants. The appointment of a new defence minister in 2016 brought about the earlier described changes towards a stricter migration policy and the previously mentioned strict limitation of the number of refugees (Gruber, 2017).
Statista (2024) shows that in 2015 the number of people who used the Balkan route for migration reached 764,038 compared to the already high, compared to 2010-2013 43,357 in 2014. The measures taken by the states in 2016 allowed reducing the flow to 130,261 in 2016 and 12,179 in 2017, i.e. preventing potential problems from such a large flow of migrants to Europe.
However, the squatting on some parameters in the Austrian state budget can be explained in another way. As is well known, Austria is part of an informal grouping of European states known as the “Frugal four”, which includes Austria itself, the Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden, and which favours a conservative, conservative budget. in 2017-2018, Austria, as part of the frugal four, favours a skeptical attitude towards such a strong deepening of European integration in the fiscal and economic sphere (Verdun, 2022). Members of this group believe that countries should deal with financial problems on their own, rather than expecting an increase and subsequent redistribution of the EU budget. In Austria's view, this way the states can preserve their own budgets to deal with potential problems.
Table 7 below analyses Austria's average expenditure per refugee by year.  The analysis shows that expenditure is non-linear. Measures introduced in 2015-2016 to restrict migration through the Balkan corridor may have caused a significant reduction in asylum applications, which may partly explain the discrepancy between the budget allocated to asylum seekers in donor countries and the actual number of applications. It can thus be concluded that the measures taken have worked and are leading to a steady decrease in expenditure on refugees.
Table 7
Austria's average expenditure per refugee
Source: compiled by the author based on . URL:                                                  Applications for asylum in Austria by month of application and citizenship 2014-2023 (.ods)    and https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (access date:25.04.2025 ). 
The next significant expenditure item in the Austrian ODA is Scholarships and training in donor country (approximately 20% of bilateral ODA) , which once again shows that international development aid is also spent on domestic benefits. When analyzed, according to chart 4 there is a slight decrease in the stable increase of values in 2018, but the average growth rate of spending per year is 5.76%, which shows the importance of the development of education and related areas for Austria.

Chart 4
Net disbursement of “Scholarships and training in donor country” budget line in the bilateral Austrian ODA, mln euro
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
There are several reasons why Austria attracts these countries as a study destination (Table 8). Austria shares borders with Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Slovakia, Luxembourg and Hungary, which makes it quite attractive for international students. In addition to geographical proximity, linguistic and cultural proximity plays a role for Switzerland and Germany. The attraction for the cluster of Balkan countries and some of the surrounding is also easily explained by common cultural and historical traditions and values, as these countries were part of Austria-Hungary. In addition to the historical proximity of the former Yugoslav countries, Austria is also favoured by the large diaspora of former Yugoslavs living in Austria. Turkey and Iran are somewhat unexpected countries with the highest number of students studying in Austria, but even these results can be explained. According to Statistics Austria, more than 250 thousand Turks live on the territory of Austria and a large diaspora can be an important factor in choosing a country for education and subsequent potential migration. As for Iran, the countries have established, more than a century old, diplomatic relations and also a fairly large diaspora.
Table 8
Top-14 countries of origin of international students in Austria 
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: databrowser.uis.unesco.org (date of access: 25.04.2025). 
It is very difficult to identify trends in the multilateral spending channels of Austria for the period under study, since first of all not all institutions participate in these channels (not presented in the table), and secondly there is no linearity in the contribution of all institutions except for FMF (Federal Ministry of Finance).
According to Table 9, there was a fluctuation in FMAFEWM (Federal Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management) spending in 2014-2018 from $3.4 million to $15.2 million, but this is easily explained by the contribution to the Green Climate Fund (GCF), which varies from year to year. 
Table 9
Sources of funding for Austrian multilateral ODA 2014-2020, mln euro
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
FMAFEWN was transformed into FMST (Federal Ministry for Sustainability and Tourism) in 2018, which changed the targeting goals of the ministry and increased spending on multilateral development assistance, but in 2020 the ministry was transformed back into FMART (Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Regions and Tourism) and spending under this channel again changed drastically and declined.
In 2018, FMESR (Federal Ministry for Education, Science and Research) after institutional changes did not invest in institutions other than the UN through multilateral channels, hence such a failure in spending. Next, the ministry increased spending at the UN and left it at that level steadily. FMEWA (Federal Ministry of Education and Women's Affairs) as it is known underwent a rather strong transformation during the study period, in 2014-2017 there was no contribution from the multilateral channel, while in 2018 the body became part of FMESR hence the values for this parameter in 2018-2020.
In 2016, to mitigate the consequences of the 2015 migration crisis, Austria tried to use as many opportunities as possible, and even FMDS (Federal Ministry of Defence and Sports), which is not usually involved in multilateral assistance to development, spent about 0.4 million dollars on a contribution to the Geneva center for democratic control of armed forces. However, this was a one-time contribution by this agency. 
Thus, over the period under study, Austria has clearly prioritized bilateral channels of development assistance over multilateral ones for the first half of the investigated period. A great deal of funds in different directions were used because of the migration crisis, which is indeed a key moment of the period under study. It can be noted that the crisis served as an element of “rapprochement” of the EU countries and partly became a reason for burden-sharing policy in Austria's external policy and that is why according to table 10 from 2017 multilateral channels have become to prevail over bilateral.
Table 10
Net disbursement of all Austrian ODA, mln euro
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/media-centre/publications/reports (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 
After researching the sources and areas of funding for Austria's international development assistance policy, it is worth referring to a database that contains information on all projects implemented by Austria during the study period and expenditures (Appendix 2).
By examining in more detail, the projects in which Austria has been involved and dividing them by region, Austria's geographical interests in international development assistance become clearer. According to Chart 5, 45,3% of projects belong to the European region, however another trend can be noticed: regional groupings of interests in Europe, namely Balkan cluster (88 projects for 6 states) and the post-Soviet cluster (76 projects for 4 states) (see table 11). Among other geographical regions, 24,1% belong to Africa. It should be assumed that the three named groupings are the most voluminous in the distribution of Austrian ODA, and it is these that will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.

Chart 5
Austrian ODA projects distribution, per cent

Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper. 
Table 11
Austrian projects distribution, thousand euro
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 1 of the paper. 



Chapter 3
3.1 Balkan cluster
“It is said that the Balkans begin in Vienna” - (Jandl, 2022). Author is stated about special geographical proximity, because, for example, Sarajevo and Bregenz are at the same distance from Vienna. Moreover, parts of the Balkans and Austria are connected by dense historical and cultural threads, as some of the Balkan countries were part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire that existed until 1918, e.g. Bosnia and Herzegovina was under Austrian rule from 1878 to 1918 (Blinov, 1998). However, it is not only historical and cultural channels that connect Austria with the Balkans. According to Bojinovic (2005), Austria was heavily involved financially and physically in the Balkan wars of 1912-1913, and was practically the cause of the outbreak of World War I. Which could potentially provoke a sense of guilt and a desire to atone for past mistakes. In addition, Austria has a special affection for the Balkan region, as a large number of the Austrian population has Balkan roots (Griessler, 2020).
Moreover, the Western Balkans are a key priority not only for Austria but for the European Union's Common Foreign and Security Policy, as European stability directly depends on this region due to its geographical proximity and nearby migration routes. However, the Cold War, the collapse of the USSR, the idea of European integration of the countries of the former Yugoslavia was seen as a favorable step in the context of geopolitical positioning, and the concept of a “security community” was still relevant (Entina, 2022). According to the Сolibasanu (2018) “A credible enlargement perspective for an enhanced EU engagement with the Western Balkans” that indicates the desire to see the Balkan countries as members of the EU, but at the same time, he also noted that none of them is ready to join the EU yet and noted the need for reforms in the field of human rights, good governance, rule of law, etc.
The European Union has helped the Balkan states reform since the European Council in Thessaloniki in 2003, but there are still problems with the rule of law, economic problems, and disputes between states. In addition, in Thessaloniki, the “regatta” principle was adopted, according to which there was no individual plan to modernize the Balkan countries to the level of EU accession. Each country developed a personal action plan in which the necessary reforms were prescribed according to the principle of “conditionality” and “socialization”, meaning gradual implementation of reforms according to European standards (Entina, 2022)103. 
The European Union suggests that the closest to meeting the parameters required for EU membership are 9 countries, 5 of which, namely Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia, are Balkan countries. Moreover, Kosovo is also considered as a potential candidate by the Union105. And it is Austria, of interest to us, that is the leader and driving force behind the EU's expansion into the Balkans (Griessler, 2020)101. In addition, Austria's historical commitment to the Balkans only developed with Austria's accession to the EU in 1995, as it gave a platform for expression and influence, which is very important for a small state. However, at the national level, the numbers are not as encouraging. According to Kaeding et al. (2024) only 37% of Austrian citizens support enlargement to the Balkans, which is very low for an EU member state. 
Austria's commitment to the Balkan course is evident in many areas. Huge amounts of foreign direct investment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Serbia and Northern Macedonia reach billions euros in each state and hundreds of companies. For example, 2,6 billion euros and 400 Austrian Firms in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Jandl, 2022)98. Austria is involved in civilian missions in the Balkans, e.g. EULEX in Kosovo, EUFOR ALTHEA in Bosnia and Herzegovina thereby displaying political and diplomatic activities different from the standard donor-recipient. Moreover, as it was stated in paragraph 2.2, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are in the top-14 of foreign students on Austrian territory, showing close ties. It can be said that Austria aims to establish close relations with the Balkan countries in order to promote them on the path of reform and subsequent membership in the EU. In Europe, Austria proclaims itself a connoisseur of the Balkans and “defends” their interests by keeping the Balkan issue at the center of attention (Jandl, 2022)98. In general, the main goals of Austrian foreign policy on Balkan territories according to the information provided above, is to support regional stability and security, to promote reforms for subsequent European integration, and to strengthen economic ties.
It is also worth noting that, as discussed earlier, the migration flow from the Balkan states to Austria is quite high. In table 12 retrieved from data-explorer.oecd.org, top-3 Balkan countries in terms of migration are presented. 
Table 12
Migration flow from Balkans
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: oecd.data-explorer (date of access: 27.04.2025).
Such a huge flow of people inevitably requires employment for people entering the country. Уvery year the Austrian Federal Minister of Labor and Economic Affairs publishes a list of scarce professions thanks to qualifications in which migrants can obtain a red-white-red card, which is a residence permit and a work permit at the same time. Thus, it can be concluded that by investing in the education system in the Balkan countries, Austria prepares a qualified labor force for its domestic market in case of their migration.
Delving deeper into development assistance policies in the region, the Balkan area in the Austrian ODA includes cooperation with such countries as Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, as well as cooperation with the states of the region as a whole (States of ex-Yugoslavia, unspecified). In general, in the observed period from 2014 till 2020, Austria had conducted 88 projects in this region. 
Austria's main goal is to help the States of the region to achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals and to uphold values important to Austria that are violated in the Balkans, including human rights, good governance, environment, climate, and social inclusion.
For a more detailed examination of the specifics of Austrian ODA in the Balkans, a database was compiled that includes information on specific projects that were initiated and completed by Austria in this region during the study period. The subcategories of projects were more detailed. The database contains information on project dates, money spent, project operators, and target countries. Table 13 provides an overall summary of projects in the Balkan countries. 
Table 13
Austrian projects in Balkan states by spheres, ranked by amount of projects
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper.
The practical analysis confirms Austria's main priorities in providing ODA. There are projects in the field of good governance, agriculture, international assistance and cooperation, social work and protection, humanitarian aid, human rights and economic development. Basically speaking, most of these spheres in terms of project amount correlate with overall targets of Austrian foreign policy towards Western Balkans. However, there are also exceptions that the ADA does not mention in its strategy, namely a significant number of education projects. This fact shows the significant importance of education for Austria, which was discussed in the second chapter of this paper. 
However, in terms of expenditure, slightly other results were gained represented in table 14. 
Table 14
Austrian projects in Balkan states by spheres, ranked by spendings
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper. 
The leading position and 9600 thousand euro for 6 years is again taken by Education, which is a priority for Austria, as discussed earlier. For example, 2387, 5 thousand euros were spent on the education project “Aligning Education With labour market needs - BIT - EC Funds” implemented on the territory of Kosovo from February 15, 2015, to October 14, 2017. The project is implemented by bit management Beratung GmbH, an Austrian company that provides educational programs and training. The company participates in international initiatives to promote education in various areas, including sustainable development, regional development and others. They were spent to support reforms in the field of education in order to actualize it for modern market needs. The project is quite comprehensive, as it is aimed at improving the quality of educational services and ensuring the relevance of education and, as a consequence, increasing the likelihood of beneficial employment after graduation due to the relevance of the profession. Moreover, this contractor was not found in the list of beneficiaries of European Commission funds, which indicates that only Austrian state money was involved in this project, which shows Austrian personal interests. 
Continuing with the importance of education for Austria, as discussed in chapter two, it is worth noting that the projects in the Balkan territory are not uniform and cover different types of education. For example, “WP-BiH-BEST, AQuiT (Active Qualification in Tourism)” in Bosnia and Herzegovina from January 1, 2014 to June 30, 2016 costs 200 thousand euro on professional retraining in the field of tourism (entwicklung.at). BEST Institute of professional development and staff training LLC, which implements this project, is an Austrian company that has been engaged in professional training and coaching since 1990. The company participates in EU programs, but this particular project is implemented without the use of European funds, which once again underlines Austria's interest in promoting education in the Balkans110.
The project “WP-ALB-bit media e-solutions GmbH, IT-basiertes Bildungsmanagement” (WP-ALB-bit media e-solutions GmbH, IT-based Education Management) for Albania from September 1, 2014 to December 31, 2016 costs more than 188 thousand euro and affects primary and secondary education by implementing IT education management to modernize and improve the quality of education. Bit media e-solutions GmbH, which implements this project, is a company established in Austria, aimed at digitalization and education development. it is the beneficiary of EU funds, namely just over 500 thousand euro during the study period110.
 In second place is Agriculture, which, due to its favorable climate and some backwardness in technology, is attractive for Austria and necessary for the modernization of the economy and subsequent accession to the EU, and also corresponds to Austria's desire for the Balkans to achieve the SDGs by 2030. It also explains the “economic development” line as well as “good governance”. Among the indicators “agriculture” and “good governance” there are no projects with expenditures exceeding one million euros in the period under study, but Austria participated in a relatively large number of projects in each indicator, namely 13, which together suggests the importance of this area. However, in terms of economic development the most voluminous is the project “Local-level Response for Employment Generation and Integrated Territorial Development (InTerDev)” which was implemented from January 15, 2014, to January 14, 2017 also on the territory of Kosovo. The operator of this project is World Vision Austria - Association for International Assistance and Development, Emergency Humanitarian Aid and Advocacy, an Austrian company that deals with projects in the field of international development assistance and one of the priorities is agriculture. The project was handled by the United Nations Development Programme for Kosovo, but the funding belongs to OEZA. The main objective of the project is to modernize and update the economy of Kosovo, as well as to create new jobs and local institutions, which together will contribute to the economic growth and development of the country as a whole. The company is also not a beneficiary of EU funds, which underlines the atypicality of Austrian international development aid in terms of small state behavior and shows a personal interest in promoting development in the region110.
Urban/rural development ranks 3rd in terms of expenditure amounts, but this category is represented by only 3 projects. One of them is “Rural Economic Sustainability Initiative - RESI”, for which 1800 thousand euros were spent from the OEZA budget. CARE Austria, Association for International assistance and development and Humanitarian Aid is an Austrian non-profit organization whose main activity is humanitarian aid and support of international development. The company does not receive EU funds and operates exclusively within the framework of Austrian money, which is due to the difficulty of obtaining tenders from the EU, which are often in the hands of a small group of companies110 (Molenaar & van der Wal, 2024). The company has carried out a number of initiatives in Kosovo from September 1, 2016, to December 31, 2019, aimed at the development of rural areas, the creation of new institutions at the local level, as well as the creation of new employment opportunities. Also, in this area 1650 thousand euros were spent on the project “Integrated Territorial Development - InTerDev 2” implemented through UNDP in Kosovo from February 1, 2017, to January 31, 2020. The project was also aimed at generating new jobs, improving bureaucratic institutions in the rural area, inclusive development and modernization. The operator of the project is UNDP - United Nations Development Programme - a united nations development agency with a presence in almost all countries, specializing in sustainable development, human rights and democracy promotion. It receives funding from international organizations, United Nations member states and the private sector. It is not on the list of EU beneficiaries, which also points to Austria's ambitions in the Balkans110.
Humanitarian aid is important for climate problems prevention, as well as migration flows collapse and conflict prevention. In terms of regional instability, the amount of spending in this area is logically explained by Austria's desire to prevent crises in these areas.
The conclusion is that the Austrian ODA can occupy a rather large place in Austria's foreign policy in the region as a whole. It is noteworthy that the largest amount of funds in the study period was spent in favor of Kosovo, which may show a separate commitment of the accident to this state. Austria spends rather large sums of money on the Balkan region in the context of development assistance. In this paragraph the 6 most extensive projects from the database were studied in detail and the study showed that 5 of them are independent from the European Commission and therefore from EU actions. This shows that to a large extent Austrian international development aid in the Balkans is self-sufficient in terms of funds. Consequently, parameter A works. Moreover, in the context of other forms of political-economic presence in the region, one can conclude about the economic presence of Austria in the Balkans through FDI, as well as Austrian companies operating in the Balkan market, and participation in stabilization missions such as EUFOR Althea. One can also add about cultural diplomacy through active academic exchange and dissemination of cultural awareness. Thus, in addition to the general foreign policy of the EU, Austria has its own foreign policy ambitions in the Balkan cluster and the Balkans. So, it is reasonable to conclude that Austria has its own foreign policy interests and ambitions in the region, which confirms the alternative hypothesis of this paper about Austrian specific behaviour as a small state because the check on parameters A and B worked.

3.2 Post-Soviet cluster
The next area of interest in the Austrian ODA is the post-Soviet cluster, which is represented by Moldova, Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia. For a fuller understanding of the peculiarities of Austria's cooperation with the post-Soviet region, it is worth referring to the European foreign policy course. In 2003, the European Union launched the “European Neighborhood Policy”, of which the target countries together with Azerbaijan and Belarus are a part. The desire for such good neighborliness is caused primarily by geographical proximity and the desire for stability and security in the region104. In general, the main objectives of the European Neighborhood Policy are to uphold the values of democracy and human rights that underpin this cooperation, but 3 branches of common priority spheres were formulated. Among them there are migration issues; economic wealth and prosperity, and security issues104.
In addition, the post-Soviet countries that participate in the European Neighborhood Policy have the right to participate in Erasmus + educational programs, etc., which shows the deep interest of the European side in cooperation (enlargement.ec.europa.eu). Investment cooperation is also quite important, e.g. there are Economic and Investment Plans (EIP) and The Neighbourhood Investment Platform (NIP) aimed at attracting investments in various fields from the EU to post-Soviet countries for development and modernization. Moreover, the European Union had signed a Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with Armenia in 2017 and Association Agreements including Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements (DCFTA) in 2014 with Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. In practice, the countries received benefits, such as a free trade zone with the EU and made the EU market accessible, but also reduced allies in many other areas such as political dialogue, energy, agriculture, social sphere. However, Armenia, which joined the EAEU, concluded the same agreement with the EU as its neighbors, but in an incomplete form, without the free trade zone.
In addition to the European Neighborhood Policy, the same countries participate in the Eastern Partnership, which was established in 2009. The objectives of this partnership are to create new and strengthen existing economic and political ties between Europe and the participating countries. Among the goals of the cooperation one can find all kinds of ambitious plans, including economic development, strengthening the rule of law and human rights, as well as sustainable energy, health care, transportation logistics and road construction, cyber resilience, and others. 
When delving into Austrian personal relations with the selected countries of the Eastern Partnership, it is worthwhile to understand whether their goals are in line with the goals of the common European policy. Talking about Austrian relations with target states and foreign policy towards them it is worth to mention that, according to Astrov (2024), for example, exports of goods from Austria after the DCFTA to Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia are higher than to other countries in the region with which the EU has not concluded such an agreement. However, the author believes that Austria is not as much interested in the region as other EU countries and does not use the opportunities for cooperation to the maximum, as exports from Austria to these countries are lower than from other EU member states. Indeed, statistics show that exports from Austria to Ukraine, for example, in 2014, before the agreement was signed, amounted to 0.51 billion euros, and in 2020 a little more - 0.53 billion euros. Presumably, for the period under study, Austria follows the EU interests in the post-Soviet region, but as statistics shows, it has no personal foreign policy interests over and above the European.
However, Austria's rather large flows of international development assistance to the post-Soviet space are worth a closer look at Austria's ODA to the region. To begin with, it is worth noting that the Austrian ODA is based on the Austrian Federal Act on Development Cooperation (Framework Strategy of the Austrian Development Cooperation with the EU Eastern Partner Countries, 2024). It is also noted there that the Eastern Partnership region is important for Austria. According to the document, the region highlights particular challenges that stand in the way of further integration with the EU. Among them, poverty, urbanization, the centrality of agriculture, which is often unprofitable, and migration are significant problems. Austria tries to cooperate with target states in these areas including livelihood improvement and people rights. Unfortunately, there are unresolved conflicts in all four countries which are to be a challenge in advancing progress in development assistance policy and needs from Austria a conflict-sensitive approach. 
According to table 15, which is a summary of the database created for this research. Here the priority areas of the Austrian ODA are clearly visible, namely agriculture, humanitarian aid (mostly to Ukraine), and education. Of the humanitarian aid projects, the most extensive is the aid project to Ukraine “Contribution to the ICRC Ukraine Appeal 2016 - 2017” from January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2017 in which Austria allocated 1 million euros to support the population affected by armed conflicts. ICRC - International Committee of the Red Cross - Switzerland, which is the operator of this project, focuses its activities on the protection of victims of conflicts. This company is not on the list of EU beneficiaries, meaning that it is sponsored by Austrian funds110. It is noteworthy that according to the database, in Ukraine Austria most often sponsors humanitarian aid projects, namely 13 in the study period. 
Table 15
Austrian projects in post-Soviet states by spheres, ranked by amount of projects
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper. 
“Livestock Development in Northern Armenia” - one of the most extensive projects in Armenia, which is being implemented from 1 December 2015 to 30 November 2018. A total of 1.2 million euros was spent by the Strategic Development Agency. The aim of this project is to improve access to pastures for the subsequent improvement of milk and meat production and, consequently, the development of a market for local productions. SDA - Strategic Development Agency is also an Armenian company whose activities are aimed at developing the socio-economic potential of Armenia. The company draws money from the European Commission fund because it is in the list of beneficiaries with 200 thousand euros in the period of 2014-2023110.
Next in importance are social projects and those related to the environment. However, it is surprising that while the European Union is willing to establish and support the economic development of the region, Austria invests rather little in this area. This may be explained by other priorities, as well as by the challenges and conflicts faced by all the target countries, and especially Ukraine during the study period. 
According to the amount of funds spent, the leading spheres according to Table 16 differ slightly, but still show that the Austrian ODA almost perfectly corresponds to the three branches of the European Neighborhood Policy as it almost completely covers migration problems, improvements in education and social projects contribute to the emergence of high-level specialists who will contribute to the development of the economy as well as agriculture, and humanitarian aid, environment and others will contribute to the control of migration flows and as consequence - security in the region. 
Table 16
Austrian projects in post-Soviet states by spheres, ranked by spendings
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper. 
  In the field of agriculture, the most extensive project in the post-Soviet countries is the project “Organic Agriculture Support Initiative (OASI) - EC Funds” implemented from September 3, 2015 to April 2, 2019 in Armenia. The assistance in the amount of 2800 thousand euros is aimed at increasing the efficiency of Armenian institutions in the field of agriculture, as well as supporting farmers in their labor activity. It is already clear from the name of the project that it is being implemented under the auspices of the EU and with the participation of EU funds. This shows a certain integration of Austria's policy with the european policy in the post-soviet region.
The environment is also important for the Austrian ODA, from 01.03.2014 to 30.11.2017, 1.8 million euros were spent in Georgia on forest sector reforms as well as on the establishment of a sustainable forest management system via “ADA-BMZ/GIZ Forest Sector Reform Programme in Georgia”. GIZ - German Society for International Cooperation GmbH - the operator of this project is a German company that implements development projects in the educational and environmental spheres. Austria's participation in the projects of this company shows that it is following the German course in the post-Soviet region, and therefore the process of burden-sharing with a more powerful neighbour.
In terms of Education priority, the number of international students in Austria from post-soviet states should be investigated. Table 17 shows the number of international students per year (data-explorer.oecd.org). 
Table 17
International students in Austria from post-Soviet states
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: OECD data-base(date of access: 25.04.2025).
The total for the cluster is 3296 foreign students from 2014 to 2020. However, if we compare this with the data in table 18 with the same figures for the Balkan countries alone, which reaches 38659 at the same period, which is almost 12 times more than the previous values, it is clear that even with the prioritization of educational cooperation, Austria does not put post-soviet countries at the top of its national priorities.
Table 18
International students in Austria from Balkan states
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL: OECD data-base (date of access: 25.04.2025).
Thus, in the post-Soviet space, Austria recognizes and accepts the importance of the region, but has adhered to an almost entirely pan-European course during the period under study, as a member of the EU. The prevailing majority of the most extensive projects in these countries examined in detail are carried out by companies that are either beneficiaries of the European Commission or are German. In other words, we can conclude that in terms of parameter A, the Austrian ODA in the post-soviet space is allied with its allies, which fits well with the typical behaviour of a small state that is a kind of shadow of its big colleagues. According to parameter B, although Austria has other forms of foreign policy presence in the post-Soviet space through, for example, investments in education, the volumes are small and much smaller than in the Balkan cluster. Thus, we can conclude that the working hypothesis about the influence of small state status on Austrian ODA is confirmed in the post-Soviet space.
3.3 African cluster
“14 kilometers, the width of the Strait of Gibraltar, separate Europe from Africa. Geographically speaking, we are neighbours” - de Fougieres & Berritane, (2019)132. It shows the geographical proximity and the need for cooperation between Europe and Africa. Africa is the third largest region for Austria's international development assistance. It owns 236 projects in the study period, which are implemented in 27 countries on the continent. The Austrian Development Agency divides Africa into three regions, each of which identifies individual priority countries. In East Africa, these are Ethiopia (38 projects on the period 2014-2020) and Uganda (37 projects); in South Africa - Mozambique (26 projects); and in West Africa - Burkina Faso with 26 projects75.
The overall relationship between the European Union and Africa is not new. When the European Economic Community, the predecessor of the European Union, was established in 1957, some of its members were colonizers of Africa. It was important for them to maintain economic relations as well as to support the development of the African region. Moreover, the cooperation with Africa was important for Europe in order to create a “buffer zone” against the communism expansion (Senn et al. 2022)3. According to de Fougieres & Berritane, (2019)132 after the independence of most of the former colonies, a new bilateral relationship on development aid began. At the same time, the European Development Fund was established to coordinate international development assistance from Europe to Africa (Carbone 2020).
However, according to the Carbone (2020)133 the relationship between Europe and Africa is rather fragmented and short-lived, which inevitably requires modernization to a more comprehensive partnership addressing global challenges such as climate change, promotion of human rights and control of migration.
With the end of the Cold War European priorities had changed. The communist threat was no longer dangerous and new problems in cooperation, namely human rights violation, dictatorship and other not appropriate for Europe problems raised (Senn et al. 2022)3. The main efforts have been directed at establishing relations with neighboring European countries, especially Eastern European countries in order to make it a part of the EU132. However, Africa has not lost much in importance to the EU. In 2004, the EU initiated the African Peace Facility in cooperation with the African Union, with the aim of ensuring peace and stability in African territories (Carbone, 2020)133.
Furthermore, EU-Africa summits have been organized since 2000 with the main objective of ensuring peace and security, prosperity, promotion of democracy and human rights, as well as addressing global problems and challenges together with sustainable development. Moreover, in 2007 “A Joint Africa-EU strategy” was adopted in Lisbon.  This agreement has contributed to strengthening the political and economic dialogue between the countries. 
 In economic terms, the EU is Africa's largest trading partner, for example in 2018 total trade reached 235 billion euros, which is noticeably more than trade with any other state or union. Europe has been quite active in investing in Africa, in 2018 European ODA amounted to 46% of all aid received by Africa, which is almost half and emphasizes the interest in cooperation and development in Africa. 
However, despite the evolving relationships between regions, they also face challenges. Instability in some countries of the African region, triggered by armed conflicts, economic underdevelopment and other reasons, prevents the region from developing evenly. In addition to economic aid and investment and international development assistance projects, Europe conducts military operations to promote peace and stability in fragile African regions. Among them there are different types of operations: border surveillance missions, police missions, stabilization missions, civilian operations and so on (Zandee et al, 2016).  Common Security and Defence Policy and its predecessor, the European Security and Defence Policy, have provided stabilization missions to the region since 1999. from 2003 to 2015, for example, 15 operations were conducted, some of which lasted more than one day. For example, the anti-piracy operation “Atalanta” launched in 2008 in Somalia, where EU NAVFOR (European Union Naval Forces) are operating, has been ongoing for more than 10 years (Zandee et al, 2016)138. 
In general, it can be said that Europe is very positive about cooperation with the African continent and is trying its best to help Africa overcome the obstacles to sustainable development and eradicate the still existing problems on its territory. The geographical proximity and historical tendencies towards mutual cooperation, as well as the need for cooperation to address global challenges, play an important role in this.
Despite Europe's commitment to the African region as a whole, Austria at the same time directly identifies its priority regions. Among them Uganda, Mozambique, Burkina Faso, and Ethiopia (Senn et al. 2022)3. However, it also actively cooperates with other States in the region. For example, participation in the military operation in Chad and the Central African Republic in 2008-2009 (EUFOR), which contributed to the protection of civilians (Senn et al. 2022)3. 
Austria's foreign policy towards African states emphasizes three priority areas of cooperation: education, security and economic cooperation. However, there are rather strong concerns about the future of the Austria-Africa relationship, as the Austrian government is uneasy about the increasing influence of third non-democratic actors in Africa, for example Iran, Saudi Arabia, as not all of them support the rule of law, democratic institutions and the inviolability of human rights that Austria requires. These factors make long-term security cooperation more and more difficult (Senn et al. 2022)3. 
There is active cooperation within the framework of Erasmus+, which provides funds for African students to study in Europe, Erasmus Mundus, and Mobility Higher Education, where Austria directly reserves places for Africa. In addition to education for students and students, Austria actively cooperates with Africa in the field of science through Africa-UniNet (Handler, 2020). 
With regard to the Austrian ODA in Africa itself, Austria has long supported regional development programs such as the “Water, Climate and Development Program in Africa” under the auspices of the Global Water Partnership and the “African Water Facility” implemented by the African Development Bank. There is also cooperation with other sectoral bodies such as the implementation of the “African Peace and Security Architecture, the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund. In southern Africa Austria cooperates with the South African Development Community, SADC Parliamentary Forum. In the West African region, Austria is engaged in dialogue with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African Economic and Monetary Union.
However, the areas of cooperation vary from region to region in Africa. In East Africa, priority is given to sanitation, energy development and combating climate change, which is a global challenge and could threaten the implementation of other projects. A separate area of priority is peacekeeping, democratization and other good governance projects. This may be due to the fact that there are military activities in the region during the study period, such as the Civil War in South Sudan in 2013-2020. In Southern Africa, priority is given to energy development and the rule of law, and in West Africa to peacebuilding and combating climate change.
According to table 19, Austria has conducted the largest number of humanitarian aid projects in Africa, namely 40, which may be due to the instability of the region, which causes problems for the civilian population.  There are no peak spending projects in this category that stand out very much, but there is consistency in the delivery of aid, such as the same Libya food and medicine projects in 2019 and 2020, which spent 2 million euro each year. For example, in 2020 the project “Contribution in Support of UNHCR's Activities in Libya 2020 (incl. Covid-19 response)” was held by UNHCR - United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees which is a part of EC beneficiaries list and connects Austrian ODA with European110. 
Table 19
Austrian projects in African states by spheres, ranked by amount of projects
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper. 
In second place is agriculture, which Austria considers necessary to develop in order to prevent the outflow of human capital from the region, as more and more agricultural regions are suffering from climatic problems and are forcing people to leave. 3rd and 4th place with 26 and 22 are occupied by “International assistance and development” and “Water Supply and Sanitation” respectively, which is not surprising. In the category “Water s-Supply and Sanitation” the priority of Uganda for the Austrian ODA is seen. During the study period, 10 projects with a total amount of almost 18 million euros were implemented. The most extensive project called “EUTF WASH: Water supply & sanitation for refugee settlements in Northern Uganda” was implemented from December 1, 2016, to November 30, 2020, during which almost 4.1 million euros were realized. The project itself was aimed at providing access to drinking water as well as improving sanitation through the construction of new water purification mechanisms as well as new water supply systems. The operator of this project, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of Uganda, which has been promoting the development of the country since 1995, takes funding for projects from the European Union, hence not directly from Austria.
Then come the previously described human rights and education with 20 and 15 projects. As mentioned earlier, education plays a significant role for Austria in the ODA allocation process. The most significant projects in education in African countries are: “Skills to Succeed” and “Building Capacity for Sustainable Management of Aquatic Ecosystems in Eastern Africa”. The first project is being implemented from May 1, 2015, to April 30, 2016 in Tunisia and with almost 2 million euros is aimed at creating a knowledge exchange platform as well as a strategic partnership for the development of the Tunisian vocational education system. This project was created by OMV AG (an Austrian energy company, which at the same time is active in investing in education for further development). This company can not be found in European Commission beneficiaries; thus, Austria initiated the project on its own. 
The following project called “Building Capacity for Sustainable Management of Aquatic Ecosystems in Eastern Africa” is a multistate, regional, 1.65 million euro for 3 years (starting in 2015) and aims to improve the education system for training of specialists in aquatic ecosystem management. The project had been implemented by BOKU-WAU - University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences - Department of Water, Atmosphere and Environment, Institute of Hydrobiology and Water Supply and Sanitation, that specializes in the external environment. They invest significantly in the development of education and, as a result, the emergence of high-level specialists to promote sustainable development. The company is also not on the EC list, which shows Austria's personal ambitions in the field of education in Africa110.
Table 20 below shows the ranking of Austrian ODA projects in terms of the amount of expenditure in each category. “Humanitarian aid” is in first place, as well as in terms of the number of projects, and ”Water Supply and Sanitation” is in second place, which is a particularly important category in international development assistance. Next, “Human rights” with average spendings about 23 million euro. Projects in this category in Uganda are the most expensive of all projects in this category. In 2017, two projects were launched at once, each costing more than 6 million euros. The first one, which is rather related to “good governance” - 6975 thousand Euros were spent in 2017 to ensure respect for human rights at the highest level, as well as to improve governance based on these values. The project is called “DGF I+ Democratic Governance Facility - EC Funds” was financed from the EU fund with Austrian participation which shows the Austrian position on the side of burden-sharing and not on the side of personal ambitions and initiatives. A second project сalled “Support to JLOS 2017 - 2020” of 3 years and 6 million dollars was also launched in 2017. The main objective was to ensure that Ugandan citizens have the right to access the judicial system and assert their rights, as well as strengthen trade law.
Table 20
Austrian projects in African states by spheres, ranked by spendings
Source: compiled by the author on the basis of ODA reports. URL:https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/all-projects (date of access: 25.04.2025). All metadata collected by the author are presented in Appendix 2 of the paper. 
In general, we can summarize that the Austrian ODA correlates quite fully with the Austrian foreign policy towards Africa, in addition, it correlates almost completely with the EU-Africa policy. Austria invests in those projects that directly help to solve climate change problems (drought control and water and food purification projects), in projects aimed at respecting human rights, i.e. democratization and development of the political sphere necessary for a stable political dialogue with Europe. Education and agriculture, which take up a considerable amount of Austrian ODA, are also aimed at promoting the establishment and development of a stable EU-Africa economic dialogue. 
It can be concluded that in the African cluster, as in the post-Soviet cluster, Austria acts as a responsible member of the European Union, which actively works for the benefit of the association and adheres to a common policy. The researched projects of the Austrian ODA in the spheres of human rights, humanitarian aid, agriculture implemented with the participation of EC funds in Africa in the context of parameter A are evidence of typical for small states burden-sharing, while atypical for the African cluster is the sphere of education, where Austria independently finances its initiatives and implements quite large-scale projects, which may be related to active participation in Erasmus Mundus. Surprisingly, in parameter B Austria does not behave typical for small states and has different types of presence, such as participation in various programs in Africa, as well as dialogue with institutions such as ECOWAS. Thus, it can be assumed that the reasons for the specificity of Austrian ODA in the African cluster have a combined character. To a greater extent personal ambitions in foreign policy, and to a lesser extent the desire to share the burden with neighbors, govern Austria's behavior in the African region.






Conclusion
During the preparation of this thesis, the task was to determine how Austria's status as a small state influence on its foreign policy using the example of international development assistance policy. For this purpose, it was first necessary to prove whether Austria was a small state. The analysis showed that by a number of criteria it can be considered as such. These criteria include, first of all, the small size of the population is approximately 9.2 million which corresponds to the quantitative parameters that the Vital (1967) places on small states. The small population size institutionally limits Austria's political weight in the EU: it is assigned 19 seats in the European Parliament and 10% of votes in Qualified Majority Voting, used in the EU Council under the Legislative Procedure. Both indicators are determined in proportion to the country's population. 
Another important attribute of small states characteristic of Austria is its political neutrality. Small states choose neutrality as a way to ensure their security by avoiding involvement in destructive conflicts that are beyond their capacity with limited resources. Neutral status gives a legitimate voice on the global stage and often mediates between warring parties. Moreover, neutrality often brings economic and diplomatic benefits without restricting co-operation with various international actors. Political neutrality also allows small states not to develop a large military machine, resource-consuming and unsustainable for these countries.
From an economic point of view, we have been able to show statistically that Austrian economy is export-oriented and rather strongly dependent on world trade. Export-orientation is not only characteristic of small states, but according to Keohane, it is often an important characteristic of small states which, due to low domestic market capacity, have to concentrate their economies on the production of a limited number of export goods in order to succeed. For Austria, such goods are cars and vehicles, manufactured goods and chemical industry mostly. Another feature of small state economies that can be found in Austria is corporatism. It is characterized by a well-developed system of relations between employees, employers and the state, which allows for the flexibility to maintain the socio-economic stability in the country necessary for the effective management of limited resources.
Finally, another equally important criterion on the basis of which we categorize Austria as a small state is its self-identification. This self-identification is exemplified, firstly, by the fact that Austria is a member of the Small States Forum at the UN, and secondly, by the academic work of Austrian political scientists and international relations specialists who study their country's foreign policy in terms of the foreign policy behaviour of small states.   
In building the evidence in favour of the view that Austria is a small state, we also considered possible counterarguments to it. In particular, we looked at what distinguishes Austria from typical small states. Here, first of all, it should be noted that despite all the constraints that small states face due to their smallness, Austria is an example of a very successful small state (both economically and in terms of political influence). Even if its formal political weight in EU bodies is limited, informally it remains one of the most influential countries in Europe. Austria is a member of “the Frugal Four” (a group of fiscally conservative countries consisting of Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden, which have a huge influence on the EU budget), is a donor to the EU budget (rather than a recipient, unlike other small countries), and receives a large number of migrants. Even if Austria cannot now be called a ‘great power’ (in terms of its ability to exert systemic influence on international processes), its historical past suggests otherwise. The geopolitical ambitions of the Austro-Hungarian Empire were one of the causes of the First World War, which resulted in the Versailles system of international relations, unstable from the point of view of the balance of power in Europe, the collapse of which led to the outbreak of the Second World War. Echoes of the imperial legacy are still visible in Austrian foreign policy behaviour. In particular, this is manifested in Austria's leadership position in the Balkan countries' desire to join the EU. Austria's political neutrality is not as unconditional as it seems at first glance. In particular, Austria has participated in EU military missions such as EUFOR in Chad and Central African Republic, as well as the “Partnership for peace” programme with NATO. Even in development aid policy, which is the main focus of this study, Austria is a donor rather than a recipient, unlike many other small states. Thus, it can be concluded that Austria is an atypical small state. 
The next task of the study was to analyze the institutional and financial foundations of Austrian ODA. For this purpose, a database on the sources of the Austrian ODA was collected based on ADA reports from 2014 to 2020. The data collection procedure consisted of collecting data on ministries that contribute to the Austrian ODA through bilateral and multilateral channels and the specific amounts of these contributions. The database is presented in the Appendix to the paper. Among the most significant conclusions that can be drawn by analyzing this database we will point out the following. spending in the context of the Austrian ODA peaked in 2016 (almost 300 million euros more than in the previous year) due to the need to recover from the migration crisis of 2015. an interesting observation is that bilateral aid prevailed over multilateral aid at the beginning of the study period, but the migration crisis was a turning point and prompted Austria to reprioritize the “rapprochement” of the EU to solve problems in the context of the ODA and to make multilateral aid channels more important after 2016.
Unexpectedly, a lot of money allocated to ODA does not cross the borders of the country and Austria spends it on itself/its own needs and its own organisations. This kind of spending does not really correspond to what is commonly understood as “development aid”, and thus the previously presented thesis that “Austria is a major donor to ODA” is a bit questionable. 
A database of Austrian projects realised between 2014 and 2020 has also been compiled.  It highlights 3 regions in which Austria is most active. The Balkan cluster includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, northern Macedonia, Montenegro, Kosovo, Serbia and multi-country projects on the states of the former Yugoslavia. It is worth noting that Kosovo and Metohija is a part of the Republic of Serbia with ethnic Serbs - 1.5% and Albanians 92.9% (indexmundi.com, 2011) Kosovo seceded from Serbia in 2008. To this day, it remains a partially recognized state. Kosovo's independence is not recognized by Russia, Spain, China, Greece, Serbia (worldpopulationreview.com). Austria recognizes Kosovo's independence and as a subject this unit is present in Austrian politics, so all issues related to Kosovo will be described as they are in Austrian politics. The Balkan countries are Austria's foreign policy interest because of historical and cultural ties due to being part of Austria-Hungary, as well as due to geographical proximity. On the basis of the collected database 5 most significant Austrian projects implemented in the Balkans were selected. They concern such areas as education, agriculture, economic development, urban/rural development. 
When analyzing the projects in this and subsequent regional clusters, we did not focus on their substantive agenda, as it is roughly the same in all ODA projects of all Western countries and institutions, but on the financial autonomy of the contractors implementing the projects. Special attention was paid to whether a particular contractor of the project was involved in the European Union's ODA or whether it was an exclusively Austrian firm that had never worked with Brussels and was not part of the Brussels development consulting cluster of firms. because if it was on this list, the company would receive the same amount of money from the EU budget as the contractor.
In the case of the Balkan cluster, it turns out that the majority of contractors are autonomous agents not connected to the EU structures. Given the above described forms of Austria's political and financial presence in the Balkans, we can conclude that the Austrian ODA in this region is an instrument of a quite independent foreign policy aimed at ensuring Austria's interests.  
The situation is somewhat different in the post-Soviet cluster. In this study, the post-Soviet cluster includes Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. The analysis has shown that it is characterized by the absence of a notable institutional and financial autonomy of the Austrian ODA, rather Austria adheres to the European Union and Germany in particular in sponsoring projects. Other forms of foreign policy presence are also not significant in this region. Consequently, Austrian ODA in the Post-Soviet region is canonical for small states: Austria “adheres” to its larger counterparts and does not tolerate its own initiatives. In other words, it's nothing more than sharing with its allies.
With regard to Africa, the third cluster, it should be noted as follows. The geographical proximity to Africa encourages the EU and its members to have a good dialogue with the region. This region is the most popular in the context of Austrian ODA and has 237 projects during the study period. However, Austrian ODA here is quite unusual as it depends on aid areas. In the field of education, Austria has its own initiatives in which the EU is not involved at all, which means that Austria's personal ambitions in its foreign policy towards this region. Therefore, indicator A is met in the field of education, which corresponds to the confirmation of the alternative hypothesis.
In other areas, Austria shares the position of the European Union and does not have its own initiatives. However, in the context of other types of economic and political presence in Africa, Austria has dialogues with African institutions and participates in peacekeeping missions on African territory. Thus, Austrian behavior in the African cluster is combined, meaning that in some areas it behaves like a typical small state that shares the burden with its allies, and in other areas Austria behaves in a way that is not a small state at all.
Thus, after analyzing all three clusters, it is clear that the Austrian ODA is unique and that exact causal relationships cannot be identified as they depend on the region and the area of assistance. It is absolutely certain that Austria has its own foreign policy ambitions in the Balkan region and here its size has no influence on its foreign policy behavior. In the post-Soviet space, on the contrary, it behaves like a typical small state. In Africa, Austria skillfully balances between these two conditions and uses the neighboring countries to its advantage.
Further research on this topic could cover other chronological frameworks, for example, more recent projects of the Austrian ODA, after 2020, because due to the Austrian elections in 2019 and 2024 the foreign policy in general and the international development aid policy could have changed due to the commitment of the leaders to other parties. In addition, further research could potentially identify other regional clusters and also, on the basis of already existing concepts and indicators, conduct a study.





Reference list
AccountingInsights Team. (2025, February 26). What is bilateral aid and how does it work in international funding?Accounting Insights. https://accountinginsights.org/what-is-bilateral-aid-and-how-does-it-work-in-international-funding/
Astrov, V. (2024). Austria's economic relations with the EU Eastern Partnership countries and Russia (No. 81). Policy Notes and Reports.
Atteridge, A., & Savvidou, G. (2019). Development aid for energy in small island developing states. Energy, Sustainability and Society, 9, 1-16.
Austrian Development Agency. (2014). KUNZWANA 1 – 'Rückspiel' in Österreich. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/kunzwana-1-rueckspiel-in-oesterreich
Austrian Development Agency. (2017, December 31). EYD2015: Gemeinden als Brücken nachhaltiger Entwicklung. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/eyd2015-gemeinden-als-bruecken-nachhaltiger-entwicklung

Austrian Development Agency. (2017). DGF I+ Democratic Governance Facility – EC Funds. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/dgf-i-democratic-governance-facility-ec-funds
Austrian Development Agency. (2017). Support to JLOS 2017–2020. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/support-to-jlos-2017-2020
Austrian Development Agency. (2020). Contribution in support of UNHCR's activities in Libya 2020 (incl. COVID-19 response). https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/contribution-in-support-of-unhcrs-activities-in-libya-2020-incl-covid-19-response
Austrian Development Agency. (2022). Annual report 2022-2024. https://www.entwicklung.at/fileadmin/user_upload/Dokumente/Publikationen/3_JP/Englisch/2022-2024_3-YP.pdf
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). ADA-BMZ/GIZ Forest Sector Reform Programme in Georgia. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/ada-bmz-giz-forest-sector-reform-programme-in-georgia
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Aligning education with labour market needs – BIT – EC funds. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/aligning-education-with-labour-market-needs-bit-ec-funds
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Austrian Development Agency. Austrian Development Agency. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/ada
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Building training and research capacity for sustainable management of aquatic ecosystems in Eastern Africa. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/aufbau-von-ausbildungs-u-forschungskapazitaet-zum-nachhaltigen-management-von-aquatischen-oekosystemen-im-oestlichen-afrika
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). East Africa. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/countries/east-africa ‌

Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). EUTF WASH – Wasserversorgung und Abwasserentsorgung für Flüchtlingssiedlungen und beherbergende einheimische Bevölkerung in Norduganda (EC Funds). https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/eutf-wash-wasserversorgung-und-abwasserentsorgung-fuer-fluechtlingssiedlungen-und-beherbergende-einheimische-bevoelkerung-in-norduganda-ec-funds
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). EUTF WASH: Wasserversorgung und Abwasserentsorgung für Flüchtlingssiedlungen und beherbergende einheimische Bevölkerung in Norduganda – EC Funds. Retrieved May 8, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/eutf-wash-wasserversorgung-und-abwasserentsorgung-fuer-fluechtlingssiedlungen-und-beherbergende-einheimische-bevoelkerung-in-norduganda-ec-funds
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). HOPE Centre for Human Development. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/hope-centre-for-human-development
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Integrated Territorial Development – InTerDev 2. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/integrated-territorial-development-interdev-2
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Livestock Development in Northern Armenia. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/livestock-development-in-northern-armenia
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Local-level response for employment generation and integrated territorial development (InTerDev). Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/local-level-response-for-employment-generation-and-integrated-territorial-development-interdev
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Organic Agriculture Support Initiative (OASI) – EC Funds. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/organic-agriculture-support-initiative-oasi-ec-funds
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Rural Economic Sustainability Initiative – RESI. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detail-en/rural-economic-sustainability-initiative-resi
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Southern Africa. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/countries/southern-africa
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). West Africa. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/countries/west-africa
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Western Balkans. Austrian Development Agency. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/countries/western-balkans
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). Western Balkans. https://www.entwicklung.at/en/countries/western-balkans
Austrian Development Agency. (n.d.). WP-ALB-bit media e-solutions GmbH, IT-basiertes Bildungsmanagement. https://www.entwicklung.at/projekte/detail/wp-alb-bit-media-e-solutions-gmbh-it-basiertes-bildungsmanagement
Baker Fox, Annette. 1959. The Power of Small States: Diplomacy in World War II. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baldacchino, G., & Wivel, A. (2020). Small states: concepts and theories. In Handbook on the politics of small states (pp. 2-19). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Barston, R. P. (Ed.). (2024). The other powers: Studies in the foreign policies of small states. Taylor & Francis.
Basov, F. A. (2019). Transformaciya avstrijskogo nejtraliteta. Svobodnaya my`sl`, (4 (1676)), 139-146.
Benkova, L. (2017). Europes Response to the Migration Crisis. AIES: Hainburg.
Bitmanagement. (n.d.). Official website. https://www.bitmanagement.at
Bitmedia. (n.d.). Official website. https://www.bitmedia.at
Blinov, I. V. K voprosu periodizacii Avstrijskogo pravleniya v Bosnii i Gercegovine (1878–1918).
Block, F. (2008) ‘Swimming against the current: the rise of a hidden developmental state in the United States’, Politics & Society 36(2): 169–206. 
Board of European Students of Technology (BEST). (n.d.). Official website. https://www.best.at
Bojinovic, A. (2005). Geographical Proximity and Historical Experience as a Basis for Active Foreign Policy Strategy of Small European States–the Case of Austria and Slovenia regarding the Western Balkans. Politics in Central Europe, 1(1), 8-29.
Braveboy-Wagner, J. (2003). Making room for the smallest states. The foreign policies of the global south: Rethinking conceptual frameworks, 147-61.
Braveboy-Wagner, J. (2007). Small states in global affairs: The foreign policies of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). Springer.
Brown, S. (2017, September). Foreign aid and national ownership in Mali and Ghana. In Forum for Development Studies (Vol. 44, No. 3, pp. 335-356). Routledge.
Bussjäger, P., & Johler, M. M. (2020). Power-sharing in Austria: Consociationalism, corporatism, and federalism. In Power-Sharing in Europe: Past Practice, Present Cases, and Future Directions(pp. 43-66). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Carbone, G. (n.d.). December 2020 EUROPE: TEAM PLAY IN AFRICA? The Africa Policies of EU Member States. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://air.unimi.it/retrieve/handle/2434/804167/1671657/2020%20-%20FES%20%28Europe%20team%20play%20in%20Africa%29.pdf
Carbone, M. (2007). The European Union and international development: The politics of foreign aid. Routledge.
Carbone, M. (2017). The European Union and international development. International relations and the European Union, 292-315.
CARE Österreich. (n.d.). Home. https://care.at/home-b/?pk_abe=Item3_Jetzt_Spenden_Button&pk_abv=V1_RED
Corbett, J., & Veenendaal, W. (2018). Democracy in small states: Persisting against all odds. Oxford University Press.
Corbett, J., Yi-Chong, X., & Weller, P. (2021). International organizations and small states: Participation, legitimacy and vulnerability. Policy Press.
Corbett, J., Yi-Chong, X., & Weller, P. (2021). International organizations and small states: Participation, legitimacy and vulnerability. Policy Press.
Cracknell, B. E. (1996). Evaluating development aid: strengths and weaknesses. Evaluation, 2(1), 23-33.
Crédit Agricole. (n.d.). Economic overview of Austria. https://international.groupecreditagricole.com/en/international-support/austria/economic-overview
Davranova, S. B. (2024). Garmonizaciya s sankcionnoj politikoj ES: ocenka posledstvij dlya Islandii. Vestnik mezhdunarodny`x organizacij: obrazovanie, nauka, novaya e`konomika, 19(4), 61-74.
De Haan, A. (2009). How the aid industry works: an introduction to international development. Kumarian Press.
Degnbol-Martinussen, J., & Engberg-Pedersen, P. (2003). Aid: Understanding international development cooperation. Zed Books.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). (n.d.). Official website. https://www.giz.de/en/html/index.html
DevelopmentAid. (2016). Event report: Moldova. https://events.developmentaid.org/uploads/2016/moldova/event_report_moldova.pdf
Dimond, V., Rajah, R., & Hammersley, G. (2024). How Can the World Bank Better Support Climate-Vulnerable Lower-Income Small States? An IDA Policy Agenda for Small States (No. 335). Center for Global Development.
Dudley, L., & Montmarquette, C. (1976). A model of the supply of bilateral foreign aid. The American Economic Review, 66(1), 132-142.
East, M. A. (1973). Size and foreign policy behavior: a test of two models. World Politics, 25(4), 556-576.
Entina, E (2022). Nezapadny`e Balkany`
 EU- Africa summit, Brussels. (2015). Consilium. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/international-summit/2014/04/02-03/
European Commission. (2007). A Joint Africa-EU Strategy. Knowledge4Policy. https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/publication/joint-africa-eu-strategy_en
European Commission. (n.d.). Financial transparency system - analysis. https://ec.europa.eu/budget/financial-transparency-system/analysis.html
European Parliament. (2017, June 30). EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, including Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA). Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.europarl.europa.eu/delegations/en/eu-ukraine-association-agreement-includi/product-details/20170630DPU09264
European Parliament. (2020). A comprehensive EU strategy for Africa (Briefing No. 603506). Directorate-General for External Policies, Policy Department. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2020/603506/EXPO_BRI(2020)603506_EN.pdf
European Parliament. (2020). The EU-Africa strategy: A partnership for sustainable and inclusive development (Briefing No. 603506). https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2020/603506/EXPO_BRI(2020)603506_EN.pdf
European Parliament. (n.d.). Austria: 2019–2024 constitutive session results. https://results.elections.europa.eu/en/national-results/austria/2019-2024/constitutive-session/
European Parliament. (n.d.). Austria: 2024–2029 election results. https://results.elections.europa.eu/en/national-results/austria/2024-2029/
European Union. (n.d.). EU enlargement. https://european-union.europa.eu/principles-countries-history/eu-enlargement_en
Eurostat, B. (2016). Asylum in the EU Member States. Record number of over 1.2 million first time asylum seekers registered in 2015. Syrians, Afghans and Iraqis: Top Citizenships.
Federal Government of Austria. (n.d.). Skilled Workers in Shortage Occupations. Migration.gv.at. Retrieved May 9, 2025, from https://www.migration.gv.at/en/types-of-immigration/permanent-immigration/skilled-workers-in-shortage-occupations/
Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs. (2002). Development Cooperation Act (EZA-G 2002), Federal Law Gazette I No. 49/2002. https://www.oe-eb.at/en/dam/jcr%3A82518ac8-d1e8-4e22-a407-5569a159bb5d/Development-Cooperation-Act.pdf
Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs. (2022). Three-Year Programme on Austrian Development Policy 2022–2024. https://www.bmeia.gv.at/fileadmin/user_upload/Zentrale/Aussenpolitik/Entwicklungszusammenarbeit/Three-Year_Programme_on_Austrian_Development_Policy_2022-24.pdf
Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs & Austrian Development Agency. (2024, November). Framework Strategy of the Austrian Development Cooperation with the EU Eastern Partner Countries: The Republic of Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova. https://www.entwicklung.at/fileadmin/user_upload/Dokumente/Publikationen/Landesstrategien/Framework_Strategy_ArmGeoMol.pdf
Griessler, C. (2020). The Berlin Process. Bringing the Western Balkan Region Closer to the European Union. Comparative Southeast European Studies, 68(1), 1-24.
Gruber, O. (2017). Refugees (no longer) welcome. Asylum discourse and policy in Austria in the wake of the 2015 refugee crisis. The migrant crisis: European perspectives and national discourses, 13, 39.
Guan‐Fu, G. (1983). Soviet aid to the third world, an analysis of its strategy. Soviet Studies, 35(1), 71-89.
Gvalia, G., Siroky, D., Lebanidze, B., & Iashvili, Z. (2013). Thinking outside the bloc: explaining the foreign policies of small states. Security studies, 22(1), 98-131.
Handler, K. (2020). Cooperation with African countries. Oead.at. https://oead.at/en/kooperationen-mit-den-staaten-afrikas
Hey, J. A. (2003). Introducing small state foreign policy. Small states in world politics: Explaining foreign policy behavior, 1(1).
Hoadley, J. S. (1980). Small states as aid donors. International Organization, 34(1), 121-137.
Höll, O. (1983). Small states in Europe and dependence. (No Title).
Hynes, W. and S. Scott (2013), “The Evolution of Official Development Assistance: Achievements, Criticisms and a Way Forward”, OECD Development Co-operation Working Papers, No. 12, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5k3v1dv3f024-en.
Index Mundi. (n.d.). Kosovo - Ethnic groups. IndexMundi. Retrieved May 9, 2025, from https://www.indexmundi.com/Kosovo/ethnic_groups.html
International Committee of the Red Cross. (n.d.). https://www.icrc.org/ru
Iranian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. (2025, May 7). Diplomacy and commerce: Austria spoke with the Ambassador of Iran to Austria. https://austria.mfa.gov.ir/en/newsview/686698/Diplomacy-and-Commerce-Austria-spoke-with-the-Ambassador-of-Iran-to-Austria
Jack S. Levy, “The Causes of War: A Review of Theories and Evidence,” in Behavior, Society and Nuclear War, ed. Philip E Tetlock (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), 231; cf. Labs, “Do Weak States Bandwagon,” 385. 
Jandl, G. (2022). Die Außenpolitik gegenüber den Staaten des Balkans. In Handbuch Außenpolitik Österreichs (pp. 523-553). Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden.
Kaeding, M., Pollak, J., & Schmidt, P. (2024). Enlargement and the Future of Europe. Views from the Capitals, Cham.
Karolewski, I. P., & Benedikter, R. (2018). Europe’s refugee and migrant crisis. Politique européenne, 60(2), 98-132.
Kassimeris, C. (2009). The foreign policy of small powers. International Politics, 46, 84-101
Katzenstein, P. J. (1985). Small states in world markets.
Keohane, R. O. (1969). Lilliputians' dilemmas: small states in Internatinal politics.International organization, 23(2), 291-310.
Kloss, Alfons, und Albert Rohan. 2017. Der Bundespräsident und die Außenpolitik. In Der öster- reichische Bundespräsident: Das unterschätzte Amt, Hrsg. Ludwig Adamovich, Franz Cede,  und Christian Prosl, 95–103. Innsbruck: StudienVerlag.
Lightfoot, S., & Obrovsky, M. (2016). Austrian development policy-from global to neighbourhood policy?. Österreichische Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft, 45(2), 11-21.
Little, I. M. D., & Clifford, J. M. (1965). International aid. A discussion of the flow of public resources from rich to poor countries with particular reference to British policy.
Mazzucato, M. (2015) The Entrepreneurial State. Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths, New York: Public Affairs. 
Mertens, D., & Thiemann, M. (2019). Building a hidden investment state? The European Investment Bank, national development banks and European economic governance. Journal of European public policy, 26(1), 23-43.
Micallef Grimaud, J., & Micallef Grimaud, J. (2018). A Historical Perspective of Small States in the European Union. Small States and EU Governance: Malta in EU Decision-Making Processes, 13-33.
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Uganda. (n.d.). Official website. https://www.finance.go.ug/
Molenaar, A., & van der Wal, J. (2024, January 30). How consultancy companies dominate EU development funding. Follow the Money. https://www.ftm.eu/articles/consultancy-companies-eu-development-funding
Morgenthau, Hans J. 1972. Science: Servant or Master? New York: New American Library.
Murphy, S. (2021). Friends with Benefits? NATO and the European Neutral/Non-aligned States. Small States and the New Security Environment, 153-171.
National Archives. (n.d.). Truman doctrine. https://www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/truman-doctrine
Neumann, I. B., & Gstöhl, S. (2004). Lilliputians in Gulliver's World?: small states in international relations. Centre for Small State Studies, Institute for International Affairs, University of Iceland.
Neumann, Iver B. and Benjamin de Carvalho. 2015. “Introduction”. In Small State Status Seeking: Norway’s Quest for International Standing, edited by Benjamin de Carvalho and Iver B. Neumann, 1–21. New York: Routledge.
Obrovsky, M. (2005). Austrian Aid Policy. Perspectives on European Development Cooperation: Policy and performance of individual donor countries and the EU, 113-135.
OECD (2020), OECD Development Co-operation Peer Reviews: Austria 2020, OECD Development Co-operation Peer Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/03b626d5-en.
Oesterreichische Entwicklungsbank AG. (n.d.). Our strategic focus. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://oe-eb.at/en/about-oeeb/our-focus.html
OMV AG. (n.d.). What we do. https://www.omv.com/en#What-we-do
Orbie, J. (2020). International development: A distinct and challenged policy domain. Policy-making the European Union, 413-39.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (n.d.). OECD bodies: [Name of the body]. https://oecdgroups.oecd.org/Bodies/ShowBodyView.aspx?BodyID=869&Lang=en
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (n.d.). The Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC). https://www.oecd.org/en/about/history/the-organisation-for-european-economic-co-operation-oeec.html
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (n.d.). Enrolment of Ukrainian, Moldovan, Georgian, and Armenian students in tertiary education (ISCED 5-8) in Austria, 2014–2020 [Data set]. OECD Data Explorer. https://data-explorer.oecd.org/vis?pg=0&snb=23&df[ds]=dsDisseminateFinalDMZ&df[id]=DSD_EAG_UOE_NON_FIN_STUD%40DF_UOE_NF_RAW_MOB&df[ag]=OECD.EDU.IMEP&df[vs]=1.0&dq=AUT.ISCED11_5T8.ENRL.....A.UKR%2BMDA%2BGEO%2BARM....._T.&pd=2014%2C2020&to[TIME_PERIOD]=false&vw=tb&isAvailabilityDisabled=false&tm=mobility%20students
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2020, July 30). Donors agree on aid treatment of debt relief. OECD. https://web-archive.oecd.org/2020-08-04/560464-donors-agree-on-aid-treatment-of-debt-relief.htm
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2024, July 5). Official development assistance (ODA): Frequently asked questions. https://www.oecd.org/en/data/insights/data-explainers/2024/07/frequently-asked-questions-on-official-development-assistance-oda.html
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2024, February 26). Development Assistance Committee (DAC). On-Line Guide to OECD Intergovernmental Activity. https://oecdgroups.oecd.org/Bodies/ShowBodyView.aspx?BodyID=869&BodyPID=15814
Österreichische Volkspartei. (2015). Grundsatzprogramm 2015. https://www.dievolkspartei.at/Files/Grundsatzprogramm_dieVolkspartei.pdf
Pace, R. (2000). Small states and the internal balance of the European Union: the perspective of small states.
Panke, D. (2010). Good instructions in no time? Domestic coordination of EU policies in 19 small states. West European Politics, 33(4), 770-790.
Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005): 
Pellichchiari, I. (2025, February 17). Trump vs. USAID: The future of American aid. Russia in Global Affairs. https://globalaffairs.ru/articles/tramp-protiv-usaid-pellichchiari/
Posch, M. (2016, May 12). Die Präsidentschaftskanzlei – Ein Bundespräsident und 73 Mitarbeiter. Salzburg24. https://www.salzburg24.at/news/welt/die-praesidentschaftskanzlei-ein-bundespraesident-und-73-mitarbeiter-art-125459
Prutsch, Markus J. 2006. Neutralität – Positionen und Positionswandel der ÖVP im Spiegel von Grundsatz- und Wahlprogrammen sowie Regierungserklärungen der Zweiten
Republik: Eine Bilanz. Österreichische Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft 35(4):425–440. 
Radoman, J. (2021). Military Neutrality of Small States in the Twenty-First Century. Springer International Publishing.
Rawdanowicz, Ł., Turban, S., Haas, J., Crowe, D., & Millot, V. (2021). Constraints and demands on public finances: Considerations of resilient fiscal policy.
Rothstein, R. L. (1968). Alliances and small powers. (No Title).
Sen, O. (2018). Strategic Aid: Explaining the motives and choices of international donors.
Senn, M., Eder, F., & Kornprobst, M. (2022). Ambitious and Apathic, Principled and Pragmatic: Austrian Foreign Policy in the Second Republic. Österreichische Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft, 51(4), 1-12.
Senn, M., Eder, F., & Kornprobst, M. (2023). Handbuch Außenpolitik Österreichs (p. 791). Springer Nature.
Shriwise, A., & Bruzelius, C. (2017). The European ‘migrant crisis’ and shifting geographies of Official Development Assistance. Barnett Working Paper 17-02. Available at: http://ssrn. com/abstract= 2024822.
Shvejcer, V. Ya. (2022). Politicheskie problemy` sovremennoj Avstrii.
Statista. (n.d.). Illegal border crossings to the EU from the Western Balkans. Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/455379/western-balkan-illegal-border-crossing-to-the-eu/Wagner, M. (2015). 2015 in review: how Europe reacted to the refugee crisis. International Centre for Migration Policy Development.
Statistics Austria. (2023, June 28). Expensive energy imports caused trade deficit to rise sharply in 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.statistik.at/fileadmin/announcement/2023/06/20230628Aussenhandel2022EN.pdf
Statistics Austria. (2025, April 28). Applications for asylum in Austria by month of application and citizenship 2014–2023[Data set]. https://www.statistik.at/fileadmin/pages/434/Applications_for_asylum_2014-2023_by_month_of_application_and_citizenship.ods
Statistik Austria. (2024, March 8). Foreign trade 2023: Imports decreased by 6.3%, exports increased by 3.0%. https://www.statistik.at/fileadmin/announcement/2024/03/20240308Aussenhandel2023EN.pdf	
Statistik Austria. (n.d.). Bevölkerung zu Jahres- / Quartalsanfang. https://www.statistik.at/statistiken/bevoelkerung-und-soziales/bevoelkerung/bevoelkerungsstand/bevoelkerung-zu-jahres-/-quartalsanfang
Steinmetz, R., & Wivel, A. (2016). Neutrality Inside and Outside the EU: A Comparison of Austrian and Swiss Security Policies After the Cold War. In Small States in Europe (pp. 199-216). Routledge.
Strategic Development Agency. (n.d.). Official website. https://sda.am/en/
Tarp, F. (2006). Aid and development.
Thorhallsson, B. (Ed.). (2018). Small states and shelter theory: Iceland’s external affairs. Routledge.
Thorhallsson, Baldur and Peadar Kirby. 2012. “Financial crisis in Iceland and Ireland: Does EU and Euro membership matter?” Journal of Common Market Studies 50(5): 801–818.
Ugolor, D., & Atakpu, L. (2018). Migration and integrity of ODA as a resource in Sub-Saharan Africa. In B. Tomlinson (Ed.), The changing faces of development aid and cooperation: Encouraging global justice or buttressing inequalities?(Reality of Aid 2018 Report, pp. 101–110). IBON Internatio
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (n.d.). Official website. https://www.undp.org
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences. (n.d.). BOKU - University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna. https://boku.ac.at/en/
Verdun, A. (2022). The greatest of the small? The Netherlands, the new hanseatic league and the frugal four. German politics, 31(2), 302-322.
Vital, D. (1971). The survival of small states: studies in small power/great power conflict. (No Title).
Vital, David. 1967. The Inequality of States: A Study of the Small Power in International Relations. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Walt, S. M. (1990). The origins of alliance. Cornell University Press.
Waltz, K. N. (1979). Systemic Approaches and Theories. KN Waltz. Theory of International Politics. Reading, Mass, Addison-Weslay Pub. Co.
Williams, D. (2013). The history of international development aid. In Handbook of Global Economic Governance (pp. 233-248). Routledge.
World Population Review – Countries That Recognize Kosovo
World Population Review. (2025). Countries that recognize Kosovo 2025 https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/countries-that-recognize-kosovo
World Vision Austria. (n.d.). Official website. https://www.worldvision.at
Zandee, D., Hoebeke, H., Merket, H., & Meijnders, M. (n.d.). The EU as a security actor in Africa In-depth study Clingendael Monitor 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2025, from https://www.clingendael.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/clingendael_monitor2016-the_EU_as_a_security_actor_in_africa-eng_0.pdf
Zenker, T. (2024) Austrian imperialism and the war in Ukraine



