NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY
HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

International College of Economics and Finance

Борисов Станислав Викторович

Stanislav Borisov

BACHELOR’S GRADUATE QUAILIFICATION WORK
BACHELOR GRADUATION PAPER

Моделирование дивидендных гэпов с помощью случайных
процессов с прыжковым элементом

Modelling Dividend Gaps with Jump Stochastic Processes

Field of study: 38.03.01 «Economics»

Degree programme:

International Programme in Economics and Finance

Supervisor
Professor
Yaroslav Lyulko, PhD

Москва, 2023

Abstract

The aim of this paper is to propose a number of numerical procedures for calibration and path gen-

eration of the heavy-tailed stochastic processes, in particular, to model the dynamics of the equity

markets. I developed an APT-style two-factor model to separate market-wide effects from the id-

iosyncratic shocks of the stocks under consideration. For the modelling of market-wide effects Vasicek

and Heston models were used, while idiosyncratic returns were studied under the framework of the

Merton Jump-diffusion process. All models were calibrated on historic data via Max-Likelihood esti-

mation. I compared the accuracy of model calibration via Max-Likelihood and Method of Moments

to the conclusion that the use of latter has led to a minor decrease in back-testing Log-Likelihood,

while being highly computationally efficient.

Аннотация

В данной работе я предлагаю ряд численных методов для калибровки и генерации случайных

процессов, основанных на тяжелохвостных распределениях, для анализа доходностей акций.

В работе была использована двухфакторная модель, основанная на Теории арбитражного

ценообразования, с помощью которой удалось отделить общерыночные эффекты от идиосинк-

ратических шоков отдельных акций. Для моделирования риск-факторов были использованы

модели Васичека и Хестона, а идиосинкратические шоки рассматривались в рамках прожково-

диффузионной модели Мертона. Все модели калибровались с помощью Метода Максимального

Правдоподобия на исторических данных. Сравнение качества оценок, полученных с помощью

ММП и Метода Моментов, при помощи бэк-тестирования показало, что использование Метода

Моментов незначительно снижает качество калибровки модели, однако приводит к кратному

росту скорости самой калибровки.

2

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Literature Review

2.1 The history of stochastic calculus and financial mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Heavy-tailed distributions in empirical finance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

6

6

8

2.3 Jump-diffusion stochastic processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

3 Proposed methodology

3.1 Choosing risk factors for APT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Statistical properties of the residual time series of returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Construction of Jump-diffusion process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Paths simulation and model calibration

4.1 Discretization and path generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Model calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.1 Analytical solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 Newton-CG method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.3 Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.4 Gradient descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.5 Nelder–Mead method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Computational infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Modelling risk factors

5.1 Risk-free rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 S&P500 returns and VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 Stocks’ idiosyncratic returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Relative computational efficiency of the Max-Likelihood estimator

6.1 Model Calibration using Method of Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.1.1 Method of Moments for Calibration of One-dimensional Merton Process . . .

14

14

16

17

20

20

22

23

24

26

27

28

29

33

33

36

38

41

41

42

3

6.1.2 Method of Moments for Calibration of Multi-dimensional Merton Process . .

43

7 Conclusion

8 References

45

46

4

1

Introduction

Stochastic processes has been actively used for the modelling the returns on the financial markets for

over 50 years, with the first attempts dating back to the beginning of the 20th century. However, most

contemporary models used by the industry professionals and academics alike assume the Normality

of the returns, which is contradicted a number of stylized facts regarding financial markets, most

importantly, excess kurtosis and leftwards skewness of the returns distributions.

The aim for this work is to develop a framework with the help of the tools of stochastic calculus

and numerical methods to account for these stylized facts within the context of equity markets. In

particular, I am interested in the modelling of dividend gaps as the kind of rapid changes in stocks’

prices (so-called jumps).

Two focal points of my work are model calibration and path generation. The first refers to the

algorithm of selecting the parameters that most accurately reflects the dynamics of the process (in

this case, stock returns). The latter is the procedure of turning continuous stochastic process into

a discrete one in order for computers to be able to simulate it. The important consideration for me

is the efficiency of these two procedures. I provide a number of tests and simulations that allow me

to compare both accuracy and computational efficiency of different approaches considered.

Finally, I focus on writing a number of universal scripts that can be used for the analysis of the

financial data, as well as calibration and simulation of random processes of different classes.

5

2 Literature Review

Before moving on to the practical part of my work, it is important to cover the theoretical foundations

of stochastic processes, current best practices of their uses in the real-world setting, as well as key

papers that try to take into account the empirical effects, not reflected in the currently used models.

To do that, I will devote three separate subsections to these topics, covering most significant research

done in the areas of stochastic calculus and financial mathematics, empirical findings regarding

heavy-tailed distributions in finance, and the theory of jump-diffusion stochastic processes.

2.1 The history of stochastic calculus and financial mathematics

The questions regarding probabilities have been on great mathematicians’ minds for centuries, dating

back to the works of Pascal [8] and Bernoulli [30]. The first attempt at statistical inference was done

by John Graunt [37], which was influenced by Christiaan Huygens [12], who developed the notion

of expected value. Pierre Simon de Laplace [50] stated the addition and multiplication rules of

probability, as well as applied them to the number of problems revolving around Bernoulli process,

which was actively studied by the mathematicians in the beginning of the 19th century.

The first applications of Probability Theory were often related to physics problems, for example,

modelling a closed system of gas filled container. Such problems together formed a discipline of

statistical mechanics. The first work that extensively used the notion of randomness to model

physical system was two papers by James Clerk Maxwell:

[31] and [32] that laid the foundations

of Kinetic theory of gases. Ludwig Boltzmann [41] extended the theory of Maxwell to solids and

liquids, and Josiah Willard Gibbs [38] used the same principles in his work on physical optics. All

these papers heavily influenced Albert Einstein, who performed the first statistical physics analysis

of Brownian motion in his 1905 paper [3]. In 1911, Jean Baptiste Perrin [33] empirically proved the

theoretical findings of Einstein, ending a century-long debate with the confirmation of the Atomic

Theory.

However, five years before the groundbreaking work of Einstein, Louis Bachelier in his now-famous

thesis "The Theory of Speculation" [6] used stochastic calculus in application to finance. He intro-

duced the idea of the randomness of prices on the financial markets and used it to derive the fair

6

value of the European option. Bachelier’s ideas were mostly ignored by the general public, however,

his research later played a major role in the formation of modern-day financial markets.

At the same time, the work of defining the basic postulates of probability theory was coming to an

end. The milestone work of A. N. Kolmogorov [1] formally drew a distinction between mathematics

and probability, yet integrating the two into a coherent system.

The next breakthrough came in 1951, when Japanese mathematician Kiyoshi Ito published his most

famous work [40], which for the first time presented a principle that would later become known as

Ito’s Lemma. Around the same time, Harry Markowitz published his most influential paper [28],

which formed the foundation of Modern Portfolio Theory. This led to the development of modern-

day CAPM by William Sharpe in his work [63] and its extensions - general Arbitrage Pricing Theory

(APT), introduced in [56] by Stephen A. Ross, and its concretizations: 3- and 5-factor Fama-French

models, introduced in [21] and [22].

However, the paper that truly formed the modern financial mathematics was "The Pricing of Options

and Corporate Liabilities" [24] by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes, followed by "A Rational Theory

of Option Pricing" [53] from Robert Merton, which independently derived the price of the European

Option under the Geometric Brownian motion. A Feynman–Kac Theorem, which was proposed in

the 1940s, linked the two distinct approaches when working with Options’ fair value - calculating

the expected discounted risk-neutral payoff, and solving the famous Black-Scholes PDE:

∂V
∂t

+

1

2 σ2S2 ∂2V

∂S2

+ rS

∂V
∂S

− rV = 0

(1)

After the 1970s, thanks to the exponential growth of the options and derivatives markets, the field of

financial mathematics diverged into dozens of distinct sub-fields and approaches. Many researchers

tried to relax the assumptions of the original Black-Scholes model by introducing stochastic interest

rates ([47] by Oldrich Vasicek, [36] by John C. Cox et al. and [2] by Alan D. White and John Hull)

and stochastic volatility ([57] by Steven L. Heston, [35] by John C. Cox and [49] by Patrick S Hagan

et al). Other notable fields of study include CVA (Credit Valuation Adjustment), which emerged

after the crisis of 2007-8, continuous research into pricing derivatives with PDEs and Monte-Carlo

7

methods, such as its variance reduction (which is especially important for pricing more complex and

path-dependent financial products).

Finally, it has been empirically shown that asset returns do not exhibit a perfect Normal distribution,

but have so-called "heavy tails" - extreme events tend to occur more frequently than predicted by the

Gaussian Distribution, and their effect is more significant. The study of heavy-tailed distributions

and the approach to account for them in the pricing of the financial securities is the main focus of

this paper.

2.2 Heavy-tailed distributions in empirical finance

It has been long observed that price movements on financial markets do not follow a Normal distri-

bution, instead having "heavy tails", which make extreme events more likely to occur. Even Louis

Bachelier in his most famous work [6] discussed how not all price movements are born out of the

Gaussian distribution. The first rigorous empirical study of the distribution of the financial markets

was done by Benoit Mandelbrot in [7]. He successfully showed that price returns do not follow a

Normal distribution, instead having long stretched-out tails and high density around the mean:

Figure 1: 5- and 10-month returns against Normal PDF. Source: B. Mandelbrot’s work

On a more technical note, the techniques that can be used for finding the existence of heavy tails

are numerous, with the most basic being demonstrated above - plotting a histogram of empirical

returns against the theoretial pdf of the Normal distribution. If two graphs diverge significantly, the

distribution of returns cannot be considered Normal. Another approach is so-called Q-Q plot: the

idea is to graph a scatter plot with 100 points, where each point is characterised by the quantiles of

the empirical and Normal distribution. If the straigt line is formed, empirical distribution is believed

8

to be Normal. Below is the illustration of the Normal distribution tested with Q-Q plot:

Figure 2: Q-Q plot of the Normal distribution generated by the author

However, these approaches are not quantitative and rely on human perception. In order to get rid

of this drawback, two metric were proposed: it is possible to calculate the kurtosis of a sample of

the empirical returns with the formula

κ =

1
n
(cid:0) 1
n

Pn
i=1(xi − ¯x)4
i=1(xi − ¯x)2(cid:1)2

Pn

(2)

The obtained number is then tested for Normality with the method proposed in [23] by F. J.

Anscombe and William J. Glynn. Then the usual conditions for the rejections of Normality, based

on confidence level, apply.

Finally, it is possible to use Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, which allows to check, whether a sample is

taken from a particular distribution, which is the most formal approach to the distribution testing.

Similar research regarding the presence of heavy tails was done by a vast array of authors throughout

the last 50 years, with findings indicating that Foreign Exchange ([48] by P. Hartmann et al., [44] by

Michel M. Dacorogna et al. and [43] by Marat Ibragimov et al.), equities ([64] by Zi-Yi Guo, [4] by

9

Almira Biglova et al. and [45] by Namwon Hyung and Casper G. de Vries) and commodities ([39]

by Jullavut Kittiakarasakun and [46] by Nicolas Merener) all exhibit heavy-tailed distributions of

returns.

The new wave of interest in the distributions that account for extreme events on the financial markets

emerged after the "Black Monday" of 1987, Dot-Com bubble and 2007-8 Subprime mortgage crisis.

As a result, new approach to heavy-tailed modelling emerged - it is possible to reject the use

of Gaussian distribution altogether and replace it with some other distribution, which has higher

kurtosis. Notable works in this field include [59] by Tim Bollerslev, [42] by M. Beine et al. and

[60] by Timotheos Angelidis et al., which focus on applying Student’s t-distribution when modelling

returns on specific assets; [20] by Ender Su and Thomas W. Knowles, which makes use of the

Generalized Error Distribution (GED); and [9] by Boris Podobnik et al., centered around the Power

law distribution.

However, the approach that I want to focus on is jump-diffusion processes. The basic idea is

simple: have a Geometric Brownian motion be the main process, with infrequent "jumps" - large

instantaneous changes in processes value (in other words, abnormally high or low return for a given

period).

The first and arguably most famous jump-diffusion stochastic process was developed by Robert C.

Merton in his work [52], published in 1976. As will be discussed below, it assumes the Normality

of the Jump amplitude. A group of models called Basic Affine Jump Diffusion (basic AJD) became

popular in the tasks of corporate and retail credit, and short-rate modelling (notable works which

use these models include [14] by Darrell Duffie and Nicolae Gârleanu and [18] by David S. Bates).

Currently, there is active research focusing on correlated diffusion and jumps (for reference, see [65]

by Yihren Wu and Majnu John).

2.3 Jump-diffusion stochastic processes

In order to model jump-diffusion stochastic processes on the real-world data, I had to study the

current approaches used in this field. The typical approach is the one by Merton, which is described

by the Stochastic Differential Equation:

10

dS(t) = Stµddt + StσddWt + StJ(Q)dPt

Where dPt has a distribution of

dPt ∼ pk(λdt) = P (dP (t) = k) = e−λdt

(λdt)k
k!

(3)

(4)

with k ∈ [0, ∞].

In other words, dPt is the distribution of the number of jumps that occurred

during an infinitesimally small time period dt. Note, that the Probability Density Function of

that distribution is almost identical to the traditional PDF of Poisson distribution (which is given

by e−λ(λ)k/k!), with the only difference of it being "squished" by some constant dt, reflecting the

shortened time interval.

The distribution above can be transformed to a log-return form with an Ito’s Lemma:

d(ln(St)) = (µd − σ2

d/2)dt + σddWt + ln(1 + J(Q))dPt

(5)

With ln(1 + J(Q)) = Q ∼ N (µj, σ2
j

) and average jump

¯

J(Q) = eµj +σ2

j − 1. Note, that all three

sources of randomness in the model (dWt, J(Q), dPt) are independent. However, in [55] S.G. Kou

additionally points out that J(Q) is conditional on dPt being > 0.

The solution to this SDE is:

St = S0e(r−λ ¯Q−σ2

d

)t+σWt

PtY

i=1

(1 + J(Qi)) = S0e

(r−λ ¯Q−σ2

d

)t+σWt+PPt

i=1

Qi

(6)

To move forward I apply the technique from [25] and [26] by Floyd B. Hanson and J. J. Westman to

write a PDF of d ln(St), where µld = µd − σ2

d/2. Importantly, in these papers, there is a significant
alteration made to the original Merton model: J(Q) is log-uniform, not log-normal, with Q being

uniformly distributed on the interval [Qa, Qb], with the density ϕQ(q) = U (q, Qa, Qb) = 1/(Qb −Qa).
Obviously, its moments are µj = (Qa + Qb)/2 and σ2
j

= (Qb − Qa)2/12.

11

Then the Probability Density Function of the returns of a process is given by:

ϕd ln(St) = p0(λdt)ϕ(n)(x, µlddt, σ2

ddt) +

∞
X

k=1

pk(λdt)

Φ(n)(x − kQb, x − kQa, µlddt, σ2
k(Qb − Qa)

ddt)

(7)

With pk(λdt) being the probability of k jumps occurring during dt and Φ(n)(x, y, µlddt, σ2

ddt) being

the Normal distribution on [x, y], defined as:

Φ(n)(x, y, µlddt, σ2

ddt) =

Z y

x

ϕ(n)(z, µlddt, σ2

ddt)dz =

Z y

x

exp(−(z − µlddt)2/(2σ2
p2πσ2

ddt

ddt))

(8)

Therefore, the expression for PDF of d(ln(St)) has quite a intuitive meaning: the first term represents

the case if there is no jump occuring during dt. Therefore, the change in the stochastic process value is

the Normal variable with mean µlddt = (µd −σ2

ddt. The second term represents
a sum of all jumps that occur during dt (with total being equal to k). It has the probability of k’th

d/2)dt and variance σ2

jump multiplied by the jump size, defined as the integral of Normal distribution that falls inside

the Uniform distribution interval, normalized through the division by the non-zero interval of the

uniform distribution Q.

As in reality in financial markets dt is not observed (as it is infinitesimal of time), but ∆t can be

measured (for example, using one-day time intervals), ignoring O((∆t)2) we can transform our PDF

to be asymptotically approximated as:

ϕ(jd)(x) ≈ (1 − λ∆t)ϕ(n)(x, µld∆t, σ2
d

∆t) + λ∆t

Φ(n)(x − Qb, x − Qa, µld∆t, σ2
d

∆t)

Qb − Qa

(9)

Finally, if we assume that time intervals ∆t are small enough, we note that realistically, only 0 or 1

jumps can occur during it (usually 0, with rare exceptions of a single jump occurring). Given that

all coefficients are constant, we can transform the expression above to an even simpler form:

∆ln(St) =

Z t+∆τ

t

dln(Sτ ) ∼ µlddt + σd∆Wt + Q∆Pt

(10)

12

Which, when we consider risk-neutral setting, results in:

∆ln(St) ∼ (µd − λµj − σ2

d/2)dt + σd∆Wt + Q∆Pt

(11)

This construction works even when other distributions (for example, Normal, like in Merton model)

are considered. Authors of the papers, mentioned above, argue that using Uniform distribution is

actually desirable to the use of Normal one. If Normal distribution is used, two sources of randomness

(dWt and Q) will have the same distribution. Then the situation may occur, when the calibrated

parameters for the mean and variance will turn out to be close between these two distributions,

which would nullify the effects of the jump term, eliminating the leptokurtosis of the model price

returns. The original Merton paper avoids this problem by selecting the parameters of Q not by

some optimization algorithm, but by hand-picking "jump points" from the price data. Meanwhile,

Uniform distribution "forces" heavy tails ontop of Normal distribution. However, as I demonstrate in

this work, this suspicion is unfounded, as it is possible to calibrate Merton process into two Normal

distributions with distinctly different parameters.

Please note, that I alter the original notations from the papers to ensure consistency between dif-

ferent sources used. The model above has 5 parameters: deterministic trend born out of GBM µd,

GBM diffusion standard deviation σd, jump frequency (rate) λ, jump amplitude mean µj and jump

amplitude standard deviation σj, which will be the calibration parameters in case of Merton model.

However, if the log-uniform model is considered, µj and σj can be expressed through Qa and Qb.

Such model architecture allows researchers to account not only for sudden surges and crashes, but

also the skewness of returns (large negative outliers are larger than positive ones) and leptokurtosis

(positive excess kurtosis, "fat tails"), which, as discussed above, are all features of returns present

on the real financial markets.

13

3 Proposed methodology

As my paper focuses on dividend gaps, it is crucial to model idiosyncratic risks, associated with

specific stocks. For that, it is required to separate idiosyncratic (stock-specific) risk from the systemic

one. I propose to do that through Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT), introduced in 1976 by Stephen A.

Ross [56]. In it, observable returns are a sum of two values: systemic and idiosyncratic components.

Therefore, I argue, it is possible to get pure idiosyncratic returns by subtracting market-wide effects

from the observable returns:

Robservable = Rmarket + Ridio ⇒ Ridio = Robservable − Rmarket

(12)

Observable returns are easily available. However, in order to model Rmarket it necessary to select

market-wide risk factors, associated with all traded stocks.

3.1 Choosing risk factors for APT

In order to apply APT to get residual (idiosyncratic) returns, we must run a regression of Rit - the

observable returns of a stock i at time t, on various risk factors:

Rit = β0 +

N
X

j=1

βifjt + ϵit = β0 +

N
X

j=1

βifjt + Ridio

(13)

Where fjt is the value of a specific risk factor j at the time t, βi is the sensitivity to a risk factor i,

β0 is the constant term of the model (which I expect to be equal to risk-free rate rf ) and ϵit, which

is the time series of the residual returns of the stock i.

Now, I have to find the optimal list of risk factors that I will regress, according to the model described

above. We can start by examining the approach chosen by the original paper [56] that introduced

Arbitrage Pricing Theory. Stephen A. Ross proposed the use of market excess return RM t − rf t as

a risk factor. This choice makes sense for this model, as the time series of S&P500 closing values

does not exhibit stationarity, but its first difference (returns) does:

14

Time series

Test statistic of ADF test P-value

Result

S&P500 closing values

S&P500 returns

-2.16

-27.32

0.22

Not stationary

0.00

Stationary

Therefore, using returns of S&P500 as a market proxy is preferable.

However, another important factor necessary to consider is the volatility of the overall market. It can

be estimated using VIX index, publicly available on information platforms such as Yahoo finance.

This index represents the expected volatility of S&P500 index in the next 30 days from implied

volatility of the Options on the SPX and SPXW indices (which means it is forward-looking and can

be modelled with traditional volatility models). For it, differencing is not necessary, as the original

time series is already stationary:

Time series

Test statistic of ADF test P-value

Result

VIX closing values

VIX returns

-3.70

-16.10

0.00

Stationary

0.00

Stationary

Finally, there is another risk factor that I implicitly reference in this setup, and it is the risk-free

rate rf t. It will have its own dynamic, based on stochastic process, and it was already accounted

for in my formulation of asset’s excess return for both individual asset and broad market.

Therefore, the APT-based model takes form:

Rit − rf t = β0 + β1(RM t − rf t) + β2V IXt + ϵit

(14)

Given that we fix sensitivities to risk factors (betas) in time and we can observe all variables in the

regression besides residual term ϵit, which we can easily express it as:

15

ϵit = Rit − rf t − β0 − β1(RM t − rf t) − β2V IXt = Rit − β0 + (β1 − 1)rf t − β1RM t − β2V IXt (15)

Using that model, we calculate the residual time series of the number of stocks.

3.2 Statistical properties of the residual time series of returns

For the purposes of this analysis, I have chosen a range of stocks, which time series of returns I have

analysed using a methodology proposed above. The stocks include AAPL, MSFT, BA, LLY, GME,

NVDA, NFLX, GOOG and CRM, and time period chosen for the analysis is between January 1st,

2021 and January 1st, 2024. I begin the analysis of these idiosyncratic returns by looking at their

plots and contrasting them with the observed returns, that also contain systemic risk. Below are

the graphs of such residual returns for three stocks from my sample:

Figure 3: Observable and residual (idiosyncratic) returns of MSFT, BA and AAPL

The visual analysis of the new time series suggests, that idiosyncratic returns exhibit a significantly

lower volatility, compared to its observed version. However, large changes in stocks’ prices are

usually at least partially explained by the idiosyncratic factors (in simple terms, when blue plot

swings heavily, it usually coincides with the large changes in orange plot).

Furthermore, we can study the statistical properties of these new time series: to begin with, I start

with examining the first four moments of the obtained samples:

16

Residual returns Mean

StDev

Skewness Kurtosis Kurtosis of observable returns

AAPL

0.0000

0.0105

-0.0562

2.9401

MSFT

0.0000

0.0110

0.2156

6.8075

BA

0.0000

0.0193

0.3146

2.5506

1.5997

1.6293

2.0360

Importantly, idiosyncratic returns do not exhibit a statistically significant mean (market drift), and

have higher excess kurtosis compared to observable returns. This indicates that residual returns have

heavier tails compared to observable ones, in other words, extreme events have larger magnitude.

Therefore, in order to explain such phenomenon and construct a more accurate model, it is necessary

to step away from Geometric Brownian Motion, which assumes the Normality of returns. One

possible substitute are Jump-diffusion processes, discussed above, and which I am going to use

moving forward.

3.3 Construction of Jump-diffusion process

I am going to base my work on the Merton Jump-diffusion model, described above. Before, I

propose the method of its construction, it is important to write down a simple proof used for the

simplification of calculations when working with the model:

As described in the literature review section of this paper, the risk neutral return of the process is

described as:

∆ln(St) ∼ (r − λµj − σ2

d/2)dt + σd∆Wt + Q∆Pt

(16)

Where ∆Pt is an indicator, whether the jump has occurred during ∆t. The probability of jump

occurring can be found through Poisson distribution. For example, assume that the analysis on the

daily data is performed, with jumps on average taking place every 100 trading days. This implies

the probability of a jump:

17

P (∆Pt = 1) = 1 − p0(λ∆t) = 1 − p0(1/100) ≈ 0.01

(17)

Furthermore, given small time intervals ∆t and low jump frequency, it is reasonable to approximate

the probability of a jump as:

P (∆Pt = 1) ≈ λ

Which we can prove by plugging the expression for the pdf of Poisson distribution:

P (∆Pt = 1) = 1 −

λke−λ
k!

= 1 −

(1/100)0e−1/100
1

= 1 − e−0.01

And then by Taylor series:

(18)

(19)

e−0.01 ≈ e0 + e0(0 − 0.01) + O(x2) = 1 − 0.01 + O(x2)

(20)

Then I plug it back into the probability of a jump occurring:

P (∆Pt = 1) = 1 − e−0.01 ≈ 1 − 1 + 0.01 = 1 − 1 + λ = λ

(21)

In means, that we can approximate the probability of the jump occurring during a small time period

∆t as λ, which I am going to use moving forward. Now, I propose the following methodology for

the generation of the Merton Jump-diffusion process:

1. Generate an array with dimensions (nsteps, npaths) (number of steps in the simulation and num-

ber of independent paths within each simulation) and fill it with Bernoulli random variables,

which have a parameter λ. Assign it to a variable B.

2. Generate Normal random variables with parameters (µd, σd) in the array, which also has a

size of (nsteps, npaths). This will be a non-jump part of the stochastic process. Assign it to a

18

variable D.

3. Generate one more array of size (nsteps, npaths) with Normal random variables, but this time

with parameters (µj, σj). This is the jump term of the process. Assign it to a variable J.

4. Create a new variables, which will be an array with dimensions (nsteps, npaths), equal to T =

D + J × B. In other words, in case a jump occurs (which has a probability of happening = λ)

add it to the regular "non-jump" process.

5. Perform cumulative summation of the array T across individual trajectories. Shift the entire

array by some constant, that reflects the starting values of the process (usually, it is the last

price from the historic time series). These are the paths of the simulation. Now, they can be

saved or visualized using a graph

Furthermore, it can easily be noted, that the PDF of this process equals to:

f T (λ, µd, σd, µj, σj) =

1
1 + λ

f J (µj, σj) + λ
1 + λ

f D(µd, σd)

(22)

Where f T (λ, µd, σd, µj, σj) is the PDF of the Jump-diffusion process, f J (µj, σj) is the PDF of the

Jump process, and f D(µd, σd) is the PDF of the regular diffusion process.

Therefore, the likelihood for Jump-diffusion process can be defined, given an array of observed values

x = [x1, x2, · · · xn]:

Likelihood =

n
Y

i=1

f T (xi, λ, µd, σd, µj, σj)

(23)

See the section below for the approach I used for determining the parameters of f T (λ, µd, σd, µj, σj).

On the final note in this section, the same approach applies to a Multivariate distribution, with µd

and µj becoming vectors of length equal to the number of dimensions in the distribution, and σd

with σj being a covariance matrices of the stocks’ returns.

19

4 Paths simulation and model calibration

In this section I am going to cover the methodology used for the simulation of paths and model

calibration. These problems are a part of a branch of mathematics called numerical methods, which

tries to find accurate, yet efficient algorithms to solve mathematical problems. In the context of my

work, these two problems are crucial to solve in order to achieve any meaningful results.

4.1 Discretization and path generation

The first problem revolves around finding the algorithm to transition from continuous differential

equations to the simulation of stochastic processes on the discrete grid. The reason for it is trivial:

computers cannot work with truly continuous variables, therefore, they are unable to simulate the

true differential equations (both regular and stochastic). However, if the differential equations can

be approximated on the discrete grid, it is possible to analyse them and make predictions about

their future trajectories (this aspect is particularly important to me, as I need to be able to simulate

stochastic processes to the future).

The most well known algorithm for the approximation of differential equations is Euler method. It

works in the following way:

1. Consider the case when we have a differential equation of the form: y′(t) = f (t, y(t)).

2. Let h be some real number, that will represent a time shift between previous and next point

of the approximation (it can be considered the degree of the finiteness of the discrete grid)

3. Given that we can approximate y(t+h) with a first-degree Taylor series, y(t+h) ≈ y(t)+y′(t)h

4. Using new time t + h and new approximated value of a function y(t + h), it is possible to find

new approximate derivative y′(t + h) = f ((t + h), y(t + h)).

5. Now, the procedure can be repeated, with new values of time, the function and its derivative.

Furthermore, this method generalizes to ODEs of an order > 1. The procedure can be written down
in similar terms: given explicit differential equation y(N +1)(t) = f (cid:0)t, y(t), y′(t), · · · , y(N )(t)(cid:1):

20












y(t + h)

y′(t + h)
...























=

y(t) + y′(t)h

y′(t) + y′′(t)h
...












y(N )(t + h)

y(N )(t) + y(N +1)(t)h

(24)

Analogously to the ODE with order = 1, the procedure is then repeated with new values of time,

the function and its derivatives.

Generally, Euler method is both inaccurate and inefficient, however, due to its simplicity, it is still

actively used in many applications. There also exists an extension of this method to the Stochastic

Differential Equations: it is called Euler–Maruyama method. The method is similar to the approach

discussed above: given a stochastic differential equation dXt = a(t, Xt)dt + b(t, Xt)dWt and time

increment h, it is possible to estimate Xt+h = Xt + a(t, Xt)h + b(t, Xt)Wh, where Wh ∼ N (0, h).

On a computational side, if the drift term a(t, Xt)dt and diffusion term b(t, Xt)dWt do not depend

Xt, it is possible to simulate all increments at once, and then sum them up to obtain random paths

for the process.

For example, considering Algebraic Brownian motion, described by the SDE:

dXt = µdt + σdWt

(25)

This process can be simulated by generating an array of random variables with length of total

number of steps in the simulation (I am going to use this word to describe the process, analogous to

the approximation of ODEs) and height equal to the number of paths to be generated, each following

N (µdt, σ2dt), and then performing a cumulative sum of them across each path. For the example of

the script that performs such generation, I encourage you to see the attached archive with .py files.

Otherwise, the simulation has to be done sequentially, through the looped script. For example, the

Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is described by the SDE:

21

dXt = θ(µ − Xt)dt + σdWt

(26)

Its forms are used to describe volatility in Heston model short rates in Vasicek model (they will

be examined in details below). As the next value of the process depends on the previous one, it is

impossible to simulate all the increments at once - it has to be done sequentially. The algorithm of

simulating such process is to loop through each point in time on a discrete grid using the previous

value of a process in every path as input for the drift term. The resulting process has a property of

mean reversion - a desired trait for both volatility and interest rate simulation.

4.2 Model calibration

With the discretization, it becomes possible to simulate the paths of stochastic processes. However,

we should also determine such array of parameters, passed into the model, that make the best

prediction of the possible future paths of a process. Most researchers agree that the past data

should be used to determine these parameters, which are then passed for simulation of future paths.

The first challenge in this process is finding a way of measuring model’s "goodness". The approach I

chose for this paper is Max-Likelihood Estimation. It determines a set of parameters, for which the

likelihood (or more specifically, log-likelihood) is maximized. This approach works in the following

way:

1. A time series of historic data (more generally, any sample) is taken as an input. It is stored

as a vector x = [x1, x2, · · · , xn]

2. The assumption has to be made regarding the true distribution of the sample (for example, it

can be Normal, Exponential, Geometric - the choice depends on the nature of the problem).

The chosen distribution is required to have explicit and known Probability Density Function

(PDF, f ), which takes a known set of parameters θ.

3. Plug the empirical sample, as well as parameters vector, into the PDF to get fi = f (xi, θ)

4. Evaluate log-likelihood, defined as L = Pn

i=1 log(fi)

22

5. Use an analytical or numerical algorithm to maximize L with respect to a parameter vector θ.

The resulting optimal parameters θ∗ are used for paths simulation.

This approach is widely known, and has proven its effectiveness in many applications, such as

Machine Learning. However, it is a well-known fact that MLE is biased. For example, it tends to

underestimate the variance of a distribution. Furthermore, when working with time series, it may

be desirable to give recent observations more weight in parameter calibration. The approach known

as Weighted Likelihood estimation (WLE), first proposed by Thomas A. Warm in [58], suggests that

it is better to exponentially weight the likelihoods:

L =

1 − η
1 − ηn

n
X

i=1

ηi−1 log(fn+1−i)

(27)

Where η is the sensitivity parameter, which is usually set to 0.95 for daily data (in most sources the

sensitivity is notated as λ, but in order to avoid confusion with the probability of a jump, I chose a

different notation)

The similar idea was later proposed in JP Morgan’s RiskMetrics™ in the technical document [29].

It was confirmed in [51] by Pilar Abad and Sonia Benito that the approach of weighted historical

simulation for modelling Value-at-Risk performs comparatively better against the baseline of regular

historical simulation and parametric models.

Therefore, WLE has lower bias in combination with solid economic and econometric interpretation,

however, I decided not to use it in my optimization procedures, as it will make the output impossible

to compare with estimates, obtained via other methods.

Now, the question arises, how to optimize this likelihood function (find the best set of parameters)?

There is a number of methods to solve this problem, which are discussed in details in the following

pages.

4.2.1 Analytical solution

Then there are two broad ways one can approach such problem: the first one is to find an analytical

solution, which can be done by finding gradient of the partial derivatives of the Log-likelihood

23

function with respect to the every parameter in θ and selecting set of points which make it equal to

zero.

∇f (θ) =












∂f

∂f

∂θ[1] (θ)
∂θ[2] (θ)
...

∂f

∂θ[n] (θ)












= 0

(28)

After that, it is necessary to check if the Hessian (a matrix of the second partial derivatives) is

negative definite for every point in this set.

xT Hx = xT












∂2f
∂θ[1]2 (θ)
∂2f
∂θ[2]∂θ[1] (θ)
...

∂2f
∂θ[1]∂θ[2] (θ)
∂2f
∂θ[2]2 (θ)
...

∂2f
∂θ[n]∂θ[1] (θ)

∂2f
∂θ[n]∂θ[2] (θ)

...

...

...

...

∂2f
∂θ[1]∂θ[n] (θ)
∂2f
∂θ[2]∂θ[n] (θ)
...

∂2f
∂θ[n]2 (θ)












x < 0

(29)

For all non-zero x in Rn.

However, given the amount of data and complex nature of both Log-likelihood function and model

returns, it is more reasonable to use numerical methods instead. There are many numerical minimiza-

tion techniques, most of them are available within optimization libraries in a number of programming

languages (in my work I mostly used Python’s scipy.optimize library).

4.2.2 Newton-CG method

The first and arguably most well known algorithm is Newton method with conjugate gradient. The

most basic form of Newton method notes, that the second-order Taylor expansion of a single-variable

function f around xk is:

f (θk + ∆θ) ≈ f (θkk) + f ′(θk)t +

1
2 f ′′(θk)t2

(30)

24

Then new xk+1 is chosen to minimize that Taylor approximation. As approximation is parabola,

its minimum is t∗ = −f ′(xk)/f ′′(xk). Then new point of xk+1 = xk − f ′(xk)/f ′′(xk) is chosen, and

procedure is repeated. Obviously, the algorithm requires some initial "guess" x0 to work.

To generalize Newton method to the higher dimensions, it is necessary to replace f ′(xk) with ∇f (θ)
and f ′′(xk) with the inverse of the Hessian matrix [Hf (θ)]−1 to get the iterative next point:

θk+1 = θk − [Hf (θk)]−1∇f (θk)

(31)

As one can easily notice, this method has three major problems:

1. It requires an initial point set by the user

2. It works well only with convex functions

3. Most importantly, it requires a calculation of the inverse of a matrix, which is, even with the

best algorithm, O(n3), which is considered incredibly slow and inefficient (however, if n - the

number of parameters to optimize, is relatively small, the algorithm still can be fast)

However, there is a way to use this algorithm without the third limiting factor. It is possible to

approximate a vector h, that is a solution to

[Hf (θ)]h = −∇f (θ)

(32)

One of the iterative methods of finding that vector is conjugate gradient (which is indicated by CG

in the Newton-CG method) that makes possible to find solutions to the systems of linear equations.

However, one important condition on which it is based is that original Hessian matrix must be

Positive definite (that is why the maximization problem is turned into a minimization one by the

multiplication of the target function by (−1) - to ensure the positive definiteness of the Hessian).

Finally, a number of other approaches to making this algorithm faster and more efficient were

developed, most notably, [61] by Trevor J. McDougall and Simon J. Wotherspoon, [62] by Tuyen

Trung Truong at el. and [13] by D. C. Sorensen.

25

4.2.3 Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno method

Another method could also be used:

its name is Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno algorithm

(BFGS for short). It is also an iterative algorithm, actually, it is classified as Quasi-Newton, because

by construction it is quite similar to the method discussed above.

Consider an approximation Bk of the inverse Hessian matrix Hf (θ). Then we need to obtain a

direction vector pk by solving

Bkpk = −∇f (θ)

(33)

Then line search is performed to find an optimal step size αk taken in the direction pk. In its exact

form line search is a problem of:

Find new point:

αk = argmin f (θk + αpk)

θk+1 = θk + αkpk

Then we set an intermediary measure of curvature:

yk = ∇f (θk+1) − ∇f (θk)

And calculate the new approximate of inverse Hessian matrix:

Bk+1 = Bk + ykyT

k
(αkpk)

yT
k

−

Bkαkpk(αkpk)T BT
k
(αkpk)T Bk(αkpk)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

And then repeat the procedure until the convergence (which can be approximately checked by the

condition ||∇f (θ)|| ≤ ϵ, in other words, gradient becomes approximately "flat").

26

The biggest downside of this method is that it requires curvature measure αkpk to be strictly positive

and bounded away from zero. Additionally, this method is heavily memory-intensive. This downside

is solved by the most popular modification of BFGS, called Limited-memory BFGS (or L-BFGS),

proposed in [19] by Dong C. Liu and Jorge Nocedal. This version is most popular within most

optimization libraries and software.

4.2.4 Gradient descent

Gradient descent is rightfully considered the most popular unconstrained optimization method in

modern Machine Learning. As can be seen below, it is really similar by the procedure to the other

methods discussed in this paper.

Lets start by selecting a starting point θ0. Then iteratively update the "guess" of θ by:

θk+1 = θk − γ∇f (θk)

(38)

Where γ is a hyper-parameter, which represents learning rate, or the sensitivity of the updates of

θ in response to the gradient. Note, that no condition on optimality of the exit has to be checked:

as around local minimum the gradient converges to zero, changes in θ decrease in size, therefore,

stability of an output is achieved. The user simply lets the algorithm run for some fixed number of

iterations.

Note, however, that this method is incredibly prone to landing in saddle or "fake minimum" points,

as it can arrive at such points and demonstrate convergence. To combat this downside, Stochastic

Gradient Descent (SGD) was introduced. It partitions training set into multiple subsamples, that

are independently used to train the model, therefore, resulting in a number of different solutions

(some landing in "fake minimums", some - in real ones). Additional benefit of SGD is that as it can

use only a subsample of the entire training set, it is computationally cheaper, which is compensated

by the lower convergence rate.

27

4.2.5 Nelder–Mead method

Finally,

it is important to cover Nelder-Mead method (also sometimes called downhill simplex

method), introduced in [34] by John A. Nelder and R. Mead.

The algorithm is the following. Start by generating n + 1 random points of θ and calculate values

of the objective function in them: f (θ). Order function values:

f (θ1) ≤ f (θ2) ≤ ... ≤ f (θn+1)

(39)

Get rid of the largest value f (θn+1) and calculate the θ0 - the centroid of the remaining n points θ.

Then compute reflected point:

θr = θ0 + α(θ0 − θn+1), α > 0

(40)

If θr is not the best point among as set of θ (it does not have the lowest value), replace θn+1 with

it, and repeat the procedure until θr is the best. After that, compute an extended point:

θe = θ0 + γ(θr − θ0), γ > 1

(41)

If f (θe) < f (θr), replace θn+1 with θe and repeat the entire process. Otherwise, replace θn+1 with

θr and repeat the entire process.

Then, if f (θr) < f (θn+1), compute the contracted point:

θc = θ0 + ρ(θr − θ0), 0 < ρ ≤ 0.5

(42)

If f (θc) < f (θr), replace θn+1 with f (θc) and repeat the entire process.

If, on the other hand, f (θr) ≥ f (θn+1), compute the contracted point:

28

θc = θ0 + ρ(θn+1 − θ0), 0 < ρ ≤ 0.5

(43)

If f (θc) < f (θn+1), replace θn+1 with f (θc) and repeat the entire process.

Finally, replace all points, except "the best" θ1 with

θi = θ1 + σ(θi − θ1)

(44)

Repeat this procedure until convergence is achieved. Cycle is stopped when the standard deviation

of the points’ coordinates in the sample falls below certain threshold.

A number of modification of the original procedure discussed above were developed over the years,

for example, [54] by Russell R. Barton and John S. Ivey, Jr. focuses on reducing risks of inappropriate

termination when simulating stochastic systems and [10] by C. J. Price which developed an approach

to solve constrained optimization problems with Nelder-Mead method.

This concludes the section on the most popular numeric minimization procedures currently used in

machine learning and optimization theory. I am going to focus on them when developing optimization

algorithm for my stochastic models, while experimenting with their modifications. Generally, when

testing various algorithms, I found out that Nelder-Mead yields the most stable results and is

relatively high-performance even when used in high-dimensional optimization.

4.3 Computational infrastructure

The entire process of model calibration and path generation is performed using Python.

I have

written two scripts perform all the necessary calculations.

The first one is called data_analysis.py, and it contains a number of functions for the data parsing

and engineering before model calibration can begin.

• reader function downloads the data from Yahoo Finance API. It accepts three parameters:

list of stocks tickers for analysis, start and end dates for the historic window. The function

29

returns a list of stocks downloaded, a time series of these stocks, their returns (calculated as

log(Pt/Pt−1)), values of S&P500 index and its returns, short term rates and volatility index

VIX.

• apt_betas function runs a regression that estimates sensitivities of returns of each individual

stock in response to changes in excess market returns and in VIX index. A dataframe with

intercepts and betas of all stocks is returned.

• correlation_matrix builds a correlation matrix between the returns of the stocks chosen. It

accepts a list of stocks, time series of stocks’ returns and a boolean parameter, whether the

correlation matrix should be visualized. The output is the (n, n) array, where n equals to the

number of stocks passed, and, if chosen, a heatmap of this array.

• covariance_matrix is the same as previous function, but it returns a covariance matrix

• idio_stock takes the time series of stock returns, S&P500 returns and VIX, alongside their

individual sensitivities for each stock, and returns time series of idiosyncratic stock returns.

See section "Proposed Methodology" for more details.

• visualize_idio_stock accepts all the same parameters as above, as well as one stock ticker,

and calls idio_stock, then visualizing the new time series of idiosyncratic returns of the ticker

set by the user. On the same graph time series of observable returns for the chosen stock can

also be plotted.

The second script is called stochastic_edge.py, and it contains a number of classes, corresponding to

various stochastic processes, which share basic methods for their generation and calibration. Seven

classes are present in the script:

• Zero-mean Algebraic Brownian motion

• Algebraic Brownian motion

• Geometric Brownian motion

• Vasicek model

• Heston model

30

• Single-stock Merton process - a Jump Process discussed in the literature review section

• Multi-stock Merton process, which can model paths, while taking non-zero correlation between

stocks into account

Each of the classes above contains a set of standard methods that share the same syntax across

classes:

• process_generator, given a set of parameters specific to the process used, generates random

paths of that process. Parameters of the process are passed from the initialization function of

a class. User inputs the number of paths to generate, their length, whether the process must

be visualized, and if so, should it be saved as a .jpg file, as well as whether the class should

return paths’ values or returns on each path.

• pdf given a set of parameters and x, return the value of the Probability Density Function of

returns at x: f (x, θ).

• visualize_pdf returns a plot of the PDF (this method is limited to one-dimensional PDFs).

• log_likelihood takes as an input time series of returns and the parameters of the distribution

and returns the sum of logs of PDFs at every point of historic returns: L = Pn

i=1 log(fi).

• calibrator is a method that performs the optimization on the log-likelihood function to find

such set of distribution parameters that maximize it.

After finding the optimal parameters for the process, it is possible to pass these parameters into

process_generator method to get a simulation of the calibrated process.

The overall structure of my scripts can be presented via a graph below:

31

Using that set of Python script, I calibrated and simulated all the risk factors, discussed above.

32

5 Modelling risk factors

In this chapter, I am going to discuss possible ways of modelling of the risk factors within my

two-factor model. There are three reasons why each of the individual risk factors has to be fully

modelled:

1. The necessity to price derivatives. For example, options’ payoffs depend on observable prices,

and, by extension, observable returns, not idiosyncratic ones. Therefore, it is important to

model the overall dynamic of not only the idiosyncratic shocks of stocks, but also all risk factors,

to be able to "reconstruct" the observable returns when performing Monte-Carlo pricing of the

derivatives.

2. If the variance of each risk factor is known, it becomes possible to calculate the share of total

risk in buying a stock that comes from each factor, and more broadly, understand the amounts

by which different factors contribute to the overall risk of the stock.

3. Following the previous point, if the risk born from the factors can be quantified, it becomes

possible to hedge it using market instruments. This allows trader to get exposure exclusively

to the idiosyncratic performance of the stock, making their Mark-to-Market less volatile and

removing macro-effects from their P&L.

Therefore, I becomes clear that each risk factor must be modelled in detail, which I decided to

do using two stochastic models. This section will also cover the modelling of stock’s idiosyncratic

returns.

5.1 Risk-free rate

There are a number of models that can be used for estimation and subsequent simulation of the

interest rate dynamics. If the problem requires the modelling of the entire yield curve, Heath–Jarrow–

-Morton model, first proposed in a number papers [15], [16] and [17] can be used. However, for the

purposes of my work, so-called instant (or continuous) rate, which can be viewed as overnight rate

for US money market, should be used. For the purposes of data aggregation I am going to use

ÎRX index, which tracks the yields of 13-week treasury bonds. Obviously, the usage of such proxy

33

introduces basis risk into my model, however, I am going to ignore it, as 13-week bond yields closely

follow the SOFR due to their short duration.

The most popular model used for short-rate simulation is Vasicek, first proposed in [47]. The model

is described by the Stochastic Differential Equation:

drf t = a(b − rf t)dt + σrdWt

(45)

Where b is the long-term mean interest rate in the economy, a is the speed of mean reversion, and

σr is the volatility of the interest rate. Before any further analysis, I decided to check whether the

time series of ÎRX index is stationary, and if not, whether its returns series is. To determine the

presence of weak stationarity in these time series I ran Augmented Dickey-Fuller test. The following

results were obtained:

Time series Test Statistic P-value

IRX index

-0.3790

0.9135

IRX returns

-5.8067

0.0000

This indicates that the original time series of IRX index is not stationary (technically speaking, we

cannot reject the hypothesis of non-stationarity), meanwhile, its returns are indeed stationary. This

means that the Vasicek model is adequate for the purposes of modelling such time series, as weak

stationarity implies constant expected value of the time series (which is achieved by the introduction

of mean-reversion component into the model).

However, I decided to also test a simplified version of the Vasicek model, which does not exhibit

mean-reverting property. Such model is equivalent to the symmetric Algebraic Brownian motion

and can be represented by the following stochastic differential equation:

drf t = σrdWt

(46)

34

The models were calibrated by the Max-Likelihood method, which was previously described in details

in this paper.

The following results were obtained for mean-reverting and non-mean-reverting models:

Parameter or metric

Vasicek model Brownian Motion

a (speed of reversion)

0.1403

b (long-run mean)

0.0633

-

-

σr (volatility of the rate)

0.158335%

0.158465%

Log-Likelihood

318.5009

317.8868

Model training time

32.8s

7.9s

The results are somewhat unexpected: two different models not only converged to the same volatility

of the interest rate (to the 5th decimal!), but they also yielded Log-likelihood, which is different by

0.2%. However, Vasicek model’s training required more than 4 times the amount of compute time,

compared to the basic Brownian motion. I find this case exemplary, as it shows, that often more

sophisticated models can lead to near-zero gains in accuracy, while requiring significantly more

resources to train and simulate random paths, and generally being more mathematically complex,

which makes development and maintenance of new and existing models and code more difficult.

However, the two models yielded different patterns when simulating paths:

35

As my goal is predicting the change of interest rates over the relatively long time period (for instance,

1 year), I suggest using Zero-mean Brownian motion. The economic logic for it is simple: long-term

rate in Vasicek model resembles current Fed rate, around which short rates fluctuate, and which

stays constant during a short period. However, for one year simulation, it is reasonable to expect

Fed rate to change, therefore, long-term rate is not constant, and it is better to use simple Brownian

motion. It will serve as the part of the overall model responsible for simulating risk-free rate.

5.2 S&P500 returns and VIX

Importantly, in my setup both broad market returns and volatility comes from the same source:

S&P500 index. Furthermore, by the methodology of VIX index [11], it is constructed from the same

set of options on S&P500 in every period, ensuring that we stay on the same spots on the volatility

surface. This means, that we can ignore the local volatility effect in favor of purely stochastic

volatility model.

The most popular approach to building stochastic volatility is Heston model, which is defined as:






dSt = µStdt + √

vtStdW S
t

dvt = κ(θ − vt)dt + ξ

√

vtdW v
t

.

(47)

Where µ is the stock’s drift term, θ is the long-term mean volatility, κ is the speed of mean reversion

and ξ is the volatility of volatility. Note, that analogous to the Vasicek model, described above,

Heston assumes the mean-reverting nature of volatility.

In order to simplify the optimization procedure, I am going to use the "naive" estimator for ρ - the

correlation coefficient between returns of S&P500 and the returns of VIX. On the time series used

ρ is estimated to be -0.7328. This finding was expected, as it is a well-known stylized fact that

volatility is asymmetric: it increases by the larger amount when prices decrease. The mathematical

foundation, as well as economic rationale behind this phenomenon were studied by Andrew A.

Christie [5] and Geert Bekaert, Guojun Wu [27].

Using Max-Likelihood, I calibrated the model to the following results:

36

Parameter or metric

Vasicek model

µ (market drift in natural measure)

κ (speed of mean reversion)

θ (long-run level of mean reversion)

0.0025

0.0321

0.0007

ρ (correlation between S&P500 and VIX returns)

-0.7328

ξ (volatility of volatility)

0.0518

And the simulated paths of Heston model with these parameters are presented below:

37

As I have sufficient approaches to modelling all risk factors within my APT-based framework, I can

finally move to the study of idiosyncratic stock returns.

5.3 Stocks’ idiosyncratic returns

In order to approach the task of modelling idiosyncratic stock returns, it is important to perform

some simple statistical data analysis. As mentioned above, idiosyncratic returns exhibit a higher

degree of kurtosis compared to the observable stock returns (in other words, they have heavier tails).

Next, it is expected that the idiosyncratic returns would be uncorrelated between each other, how-

ever, it is not the case. To study this effect, I constructed a correlation matrix:

As can be seen, some stocks still exhibit statistically significant correlation of returns, even after

removing reactions market-wide effects. By studying the correlation closer, I came to the conclusion,

that correlated stocks usually fall into the same industry. For example, Microsoft (MSFT) and Apple

(AAPL), Salesforce (CRM), Alphabet (GOOG) and NVidia (NVDA) all have pairwise correlation

coefficient above 0.2, which can be considered statistically significant given a sample size of 752

38

(three years of daily trading data). Interestingly, Boeing (BA) and Microsoft have a statistically

significant negative correlation between returns equal to -0.21. My only possible explanation of this

phenomenon is that both Microsoft and Boeing are major government contractors, providing services

for the American military, so they may be competing on some contracts, which yields significant

negative correlation.

In conclusion, even after removing market-wide effects stocks still exhibit

statistically significant correlation, therefore, in order to properly calibrate the model it is necessary

to take into account the interaction between stocks’ returns.

In order to do this, I decided to calibrate a n-dimensional Multivariate correlated Merton Jump-

diffusion process, which would take into account the rich cross-stock interactions, as well as leptokur-

tosis of the idiosyncratic stocks’ returns. Generally, to generate the Multivariate Normal Distribu-

tion, two parameters must be provided: an vector of mean values and a n-dimensional covariance

matrix - this is analogous to the Univariate Normal Distribution, which takes mean and variance

as the input. Therefore, the process of calibration of the model involves finding the mean vector

and covariance matrix that maximize log-likelihood, when the model is inputted the historic returns

data.

However, in order to reduce computational complexity of the model, I am going to fix the correlations

between stock returns and reduce the problem to finding optimal vectors of means, covariance

matrices and the probability of a jump (λ) for the historic data. Even with that, this optimization

problem is significantly computationally complex: the model trained on a selection of just 4 stocks

finished calibration in more than an hour on my PC.

The visualization of the paths generated with the MLE-optimized parameters, is presented below:

39

For this dataset, the results of the calibration showed insignificant improvement in the in-sample

back-testing, compared to simpler and less computationally expensive models:

Model

Log-Likelihood Model calibration time

Correlated Multivariate Merton

Uncorrelated Multivariate Merton

Multivariate Normal

8297

7803

7589

61 minutes

60 minutes

16 minutes

Therefore, a trade-off between the accuracy of the model and calibration time arises. This, alongside

other computational concerns, will be discussed in the following section.

40

6 Relative computational efficiency of the Max-Likelihood

estimator

The model calibration via Max-Likelihood estimation is highly computationally expensive. It suffers

from the curse of dimensionality, in other words, the time required to train a model rapidly increases

with each new parameter. Calibration of the largest model - multivariate Merton jump-diffusion

process, which, when optimized, has 4n + 1 parameters to calibrate, and when trained with the

"naive" approach of optimizing each entry in the covariance matrix - 2n2 + 2n + 1 parameters (n is

the number of stocks the model is trained on).

It took me over an hour to train the model on the dataset of 3 years (752 trading days) for only 4

stocks. Therefore, it is appears unrealistic to train the any "large" model on the full set of parameters.

To avoid the curse of dimensionality, I found two alternative approaches to decrease computational

complexity of the optimization. The first is to either set by hand or pre-calculate some of the pa-

rameters of the model. For example, set µ = 0 (which is reasonable, as the APT-based algorithm

removes risk-free rate from the drift in risk-neutral setting, therefore, making drift term infinitesi-

mally small) or use correlation coefficients ρ, calculated directly from the time series. However, it is

possible to take this approach one step further: instead of using max-likelihood, is it possible to use

Method of Moments to estimate parameters? The next subsection discusses this problem in details.

6.1 Model Calibration using Method of Moments

To begin my analysis of the effectiveness of the Method of Moments in comparison to Max-Likelihood

estimation, I decided to calibrate two parameters (µ, σ) of the Geometric Brownian motion for the

idiosyncratic returns of a number of stocks. The results are presented below.

41

Stock MLE Parameters MoM parameters MLE Log-likelihood MoM Log-Likelihood

AAPL

(0, 0.0104)

(0, 0.0104)

2370.0899

2370.0896

MSFT

(0, 0.0108)

(0, 0.0108)

2336.1454

2336.1451

BA

(0, 0.0192)

(0, 0.0192)

1904.2856

1904.2853

GOOG

(0, 0.0133)

(0, 0.0133)

2179.3179

2179.3176

NVDA

(0, 0.0228)

(0, 0.0228)

1775.7169

1775.7165

GME

(0, 0.0955)

(0, 0.0955)

699.6639

699.6635

As can be seen in the table above, for all stocks examined, the difference in the Log-likelihood

between MLE and MoM-estimated parameters is within the 4th decimal. The obtained parameters

of the process are identical to the 4th decimal, although they obviously differ, as Log-likelihoods

resulting from the use of two methods discussed are not equal. However, the calibration time for

MoM is near instant, meanwhile MLE takes up to 10 seconds to calibrate two parameters of the

model on the 3 years of data.

Moving further, I decided to examine the differences the method of model calibration makes on the

Log-Likelihood of Merton jump-diffusion model.

6.1.1 Method of Moments for Calibration of One-dimensional Merton Process

Importantly, it is impossible to apply the same method to the jump diffusion processes, as they con-

tain two sources of randomness. If the same set of parameters is passed into both distributions used,

in case of Merton model, it simply becomes a regular Normal distribution with given parameters,

which eliminates the purpose of the Jump-diffusion process, as such construction does not account

for stylized facts of the stock returns (including heavy tails and left skew).

I propose a simple, yet effective numerical method for calibrating jump-diffusion model on the

historical time series of returns. For simplicity I am going to call it Split-MoM. It can be done in

four steps:

42

1. Calculate the mean and standard deviation of the original time series of returns.

2. Split the time series: all the returns that lie within 2σ of the mean fall into one sample

("non-jump"), the other returns fall into another one ("jump").

3. Finally, calculate new means and standard deviations for these two samples. Use them as the

parameters of the model.

4. The probability of a jump is estimated as the number of elements in the "jump" sample, divided

by the length of the original time series of returns.

Such simple approach yield relatively good results: the average difference between the Log-Likelihood

of the Max-Likelihood estimated model (which took on average more than 2 minutes to run) and

Split-MoM approach is 0.52%. The table below shows the details:

Stock MLE Log-likelihood

Split-MoM Log-Likelihood Difference in Log-Likelihood

AAPL

2414.7217

2405.1927

MSFT

2403.5536

2400.1758

BA

1944.0062

1934.1305

GOOG

2274.7307

2266.0934

NVDA

1825.3581

1822.0911

GME

1087.0146

1070.5373

0.4%

0.14%

0.51%

0.38%

0.18%

1.54%

Therefore, it is possible to conclude that the proposed Split-MoM algorithm is an effective alternative

to the Max-Likelihood estimation when calibrating One-dimensional Merton model.

6.1.2 Method of Moments for Calibration of Multi-dimensional Merton Process

The similar technique could be used to calibrate the Multi-variable Merton process. The only

difference is that it is required to generate a covariance matrix to get a PDF of the multivariate

distribution. I suggest the following procedure:

43

1. Calculate a correlation matrix for returns of between stocks.

2. Split each individual time series of returns into two samples: inside 2σ and outside of them,

analogous to the Split-MoM algorithm, described for the One-dimensional Merton model.

3. Calculate means and standard deviations for both samples for each stock.

4. Get covariance matrices for "Non-jump" (inside 2σ) and "Jump" (outside 2σ) samples by multi-

plying each entry in the array of correlation matrix by the standard deviations of two samples

of stocks that are covariated.

5. Use the obtained covariance matrices alongside arrays of means for two samples to generate

the PDF or paths of the distribution.

This method enjoys high computational efficiency, however, the results of the calibration are infe-

rior, compared to both Max-Likelihood estimation and even correlated Geometric Brownian Motion

(which does not capture heavy tails of the empirical distribution). In my future works, I may propose

different approach of using Method of Moments for the calibration of Multivariate Merton Jump-

diffusion process, however, now I am going to suggest using either full Max-Likelihood-calibrated

model or its Normal analogue, which has a much lower computational complexity.

44

7 Conclusion

With this paper, I achieved a number of key goals I had set for myself. Firstly, I developed a

APT-style model that allowed me to remove market wide effects from the observable stock returns,

which was necessary for the accurate modelling of the idiosyncratic shocks, such as dividend gaps.

Secondly, I packaged all the functions I have written for the data analysis done for this paper into

a library, that can be easily used for a number of other applications. Thirdly, I created a library

stochastic_edge.py, which contained a number of popular stochastic processes as classes, with

unified method system, that can be flexibly used for the model calibration and path generation.

Finally, I tested the effectiveness of the Max-Likelihood estimation against Method of Moments

estimation. The conclusion I came to was that Method of Moments offers a less accuracy (for most

models, the difference is less than 1%), when in-sample back-test is performed, however, it is much

less computationally expensive - the difference may be by the factor of thousands.

Jump-diffusion processes proved to be capable of more accurately reflecting the stylized facts of

the equity markets, in particular, the heavy-tailed and left-skewed distribution of returns. I have

successfully developed algorithms of Max-Likelihood and Method of Moments for their calibration,

which can be used in the real-world setting.

All the scripts used in this paper will be attached alongside this file.

45

8 References

1. A. N. Kolmogorov. Foundations of the Theory of Probability (1933).

2. Alan D. White, John Hull. Pricing Interest-Rate-Derivative Securities. Review of Financial

Studies 3, 573–592 (4 1990).

3. Albert Einstein. Über die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte Bewe-

gung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen (1905).

4. Almira Biglova, Sergio Ortobelli, Svetlozar Rachev, Frank J. Fabozzi. Modeling, Estimation,

and Optimization of Equity Portfolios with Heavy-tailed Distributions. Optimizing Optimiza-

tion, 115–117 (2009).

5. Andrew A. Christie. The stochastic behavior of common stock variances: Value, leverage and

interest rate effects. Journal of Financial Economics 10, 407–432 (4 1982).

6. Bachelier, L. The Theory of Speculation (1900).

7. Benoit Mandelbrot. The variation of certain speculative prices. The Journal of Busines 36,

394–419 (4 1963).

8. Blaise Pascal. Treatise on the arithmetic triangle (1665).

9. Boris Podobnik, Ivo Grosse, H Eugene Stanley. Stochastic processes with power-law stability

and a crossover in power-law correlations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications

316, 153–159 (1-4 2002).

10. C. J. Price. A modified Nelder-Mead barrier method for constrained optimization. Numerical

Algebra, Control and Optimization 11, 613–631 (4 2021).

11. Cboe Global Indices, LLC. Volatility Index®Methodology: Cboe Volatility Index® (2022).

12. Christiaan Huygens. De ratiociniis in ludo aleae (1657).

13. D. C. Sorensen. Newton’s method with a model trust-region modification (1980).

14. Darrell Duffie, Nicolae Gârleanu. Risk and Valuation of Collateralized Debt Obligations. Fi-

nancial Analysts Journal 57, 41–59 (2001).

15. David Heath, Robert Jarrow and Andrew Morton. Bond Pricing and the Term Structure of

Interest Rates: A Discrete Time Approximation. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative

Analysis 25, 419–440 (4 1990).

46

16. David Heath, Robert Jarrow and Andrew Morton. Contingent claim valuation with a random

evolution of interest rates. Review of Futures Markets 9 (1 1990).

17. David Heath, Robert Jarrow and Andrew Morton. Bond Pricing and the Term Structure of

Interest Rates: A New Methodology for Contingent Claims Valuation. Econometrica 60, 77–

105 (1 1992).

18. David S. Bates. Jumps and Stochastic Volatility: Exchange Rate Processes Implicit in Deutsche

Mark Options. The Review of Financial Studies 9, 69–107 (1 1996).

19. Dong C. Liu, Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization.

Mathematical programming 45, 503–528 (1989).

20. Ender Su and Thomas W. Knowles. Asian Pacific Stock Market Volatility Modeling and Value

at Risk Analysis. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade 42, 18–62 (2 2006).

21. Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns. Journal

of Finance 47, 427–465 (2 1992).

22. Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and

bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56 (1993).

23. F. J. Anscombe, William J. Glynn. Distribution of the Kurtosis Statistic b2 for Normal Samples.

Biometrika 70, 227–234 (1983).

24. Fischer Black, Myron Scholes. The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities. The Journal

of Political Economy 81, 637–654 (3 1973).

25. Floyd B. Hanson, J. J. Westman. Jump-Diffusion Stock Return Models in Finance: Stochastic

Process Density with Uniform-Jump Amplitude (2002).

26. Floyd B. Hanson, J. J. Westman. Portfolio Optimization with Jump–Diffusions: Estimation

and Application (2002).

27. Geert Bekaert, Guojun Wu. Asymmetric Volatility and Risk in Equity Markets. The Review of

Financial Studies 13, 1–42 (1 2000).

28. Harry Markowitz. Portfolio Selection (1952).

29. J.P.Morgan/Reuters. RiskMetrics™—Technical Document (1996).

30. Jacob Bernoulli. Ars Conjectandi (1713).

47

31. James Clerk Maxwell. Illustrations of the dynamical theory of gases. Part I. On the motions

and collisions of perfectly elastic spheres (1860).

32. James Clerk Maxwell. Illustrations of the dynamical theory of gases. Part II. On the process

of diffusion of two or more kinds of moving particles among one another (1860).

33. Jean Baptiste Perrin. Brownian movement and molecular reality (1909).

34. John A. Nelder, R. Mead. A simplex method for function minimization. Computer Journal 7,

308–313 (4 1965).

35. John C. Cox. Notes on Option Pricing I: Constant Elasticity of Diffusions (1975).

36. John C. Cox, Jonathan Ingersoll, Stephen A Ross. A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest

Rates. Econometrica 53, 385–407 (2 1985).

37. John Graunt. Natural and Political Observations Made upon the Bills of Mortality (1662).

38. Josiah Willard Gibbs. Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics (1902).

39. Jullavut Kittiakarasakun. Heavy-Tailed Distribution of Commodity Prices and the Effective-

ness of VaR Models. Frontiers of Economics and Globalization 13, 125–137 (2013).

40. Kiyoshi Ito. On stochastic differential equations (1951).

41. Ludwig Boltzmann. On the Relationship between the Second Fundamental Theorem of the

Mechanical Theory of Heat and Probability Calculations Regarding the Conditions for Thermal

Equilibrium (1877).

42. M. Beine, S. Laurent and C. Lecourt. Accounting for Conditional Leptokurtosis and Closing

Days Effects in FIGARCH Models of Daily Exchange Rates. Applied Financial Economics 12,

589–600 (2002).

43. Marat Ibragimov, Rustam Ibragimov, Paul Kattuman. Emerging markets and heavy tails.

Journal of Banking & Finance 37, 2546–2559 (2013).

44. Michel M. Dacorogna, Ulrich A. Müller, Olivier V. Pictet, Casper G. de Vries. Extremal Forex

Returns in Extremely Large Data Sets. Extremes 4, 105–127 (2001).

45. Namwon Hyung, Casper G. de Vries. Portfolio selection with heavy tails. Journal of Empirical

Finance 14, 383–400 (3 2007).

46. Nicolas Merener. Concentrated Production and Heavy Tails in Commodity Returns. SSRN

Electronic Journal (2013).

48

47. Oldřich Vašíček. An equilibrium characterization of the term structure. Journal of Financial

Economics 5, 177–188 (2 1977).

48. P. Hartmann, S. Straetmans, C.G. de Vries. Heavy tails and currency crises. Journal of Em-

pirical Finance 17, 241–254 (2009).

49. Patrick S. Hagan, Deep Kumar, Andrew Lesniewski, Diana Woodward. Managing smile risk.

Wilmott Magazine, 84–108 (2002).

50. Pierre Simon de Laplace. Théorie analytique des probabilités (1812).

51. Pilar Abad, Sonia Benito. A detailed comparison of value at risk estimates. Mathematics and

Computers in Simulation 94, 258–276 (2013).

52. Robert C. Merton. Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous. Journal of

Financial Economics 3, 125–144 (1-2 1976).

53. Robert Merton. A Rational Theory of Option Pricing. Bell Journal of Economics and Man-

agement Science 4, 141–183 (1 1973).

54. Russell R. Barton, John S. Ivey, Jr. Nelder-Mead Simplex Modifications for Simulation Opti-

mization. Management Science 42, 954–973 (7 1996).

55. S.G. Kou. Jump-Diffusion Models for Asset Pricing in Financial Engineering (2008).

56. Stephen A. Ross. The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing. Journal of Economic Theory

13, 341–360 (1976).

57. Steven L. Heston. A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications

to bond and currency options. Review of Financial Studies 6, 327–343 (2 1993).

58. Thomas A. Warm. Weighted likelihood estimation of ability in item response theory. Psychome-

trika 54, 427–450 (1989).

59. Tim Bollerslev. A Conditionally Heteroskedastic Time Series Model for Speculative Prices and

Rates of Return. The Review of Economics and Statistics 69, 542–547 (3 1987).

60. Timotheos Angelidis, Alexandros Benos, Stavros Degiannakis. The use of GARCH models in

VaR estimation. Statistical Methodology 1, 105–128 (2004).

61. Trevor J. McDougall, Simon J. Wotherspoon. A simple modification of Newton’s method to

achieve convergence of order 2.4. Applied Mathematics Letters 29, 20–25 (2014).

49

62. Tuyen Trung Truong, Tat Dat To, Hang-Tuan Nguyen, Thu Hang Nguyen, Hoang Phuong

Nguyen, Maged Helmy. A Fast and Simple Modification of Newton’s Method Avoiding Saddle

Points. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications 199, 805–830 (2023).

63. William Sharpe. Capital asset pricer: A theory of market equilibrium under condition of risk.

The Journal of Finance 19, 425–442 (3 1964).

64. Zi-Yi Guo. Heavy-tailed Distributions and Risk Management of Equity Market Tail Events.

Journal of Risk & Control 4, 31–41 (1 2017).

65. Yihren Wu, Majnu John. A jump-diffusion process for asset price with non-independent jumps.

Journal of Stochastic Analysis 3 (4 2022).

50

