National Research University Higher School of Economics 

Graduate School of Business 

Chigai Kseniia Sergeevna 

LOW-CODE DEVELOPMENT PLATFORM PROTOTYPE 

DEVELOPMENT FOR IRRIGATION MANAGEMENT IN RUSSIAN 

AGRICULTURE 

Bachelor’s Thesis 

in the field 38.03.05 Business Informatics 

Degree Programme “Management and Digital Innovation” 

Academic supervisor 

Associate Professor at Graduate School of Business 

Department of Strategic and International Management 

Nikolai Vodolazskiy 

Research adviser 

Associate Professor at Graduate School of Business 

Department of Business Informatics 

Mikhail Georgiev 

Moscow, 2025 

 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION................................................................................................... 3 

CHAPTER 1. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND OF THE LOW-CODE 

TECHNOLOGY...................................................................................................... 6 

1.1. DEFINITION AND KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LOW-CODE 

TECHNOLOGY...................................................................................................6 

1.2. LOW-CODE PERSPECTIVES IN THE AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY 11 

1.3. TOPIC JUSTIFICATION. GLOBAL RELEVANCE OF WATER 

SHORTAGE....................................................................................................... 14 

1.4. CURRENT SITUATION IN RUSSIAN AGRICULTURE........................ 16 

1.5. RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS................................................................ 18 

CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH DESIGN OF LOW-CODE UTILIZATION IN 

THE AGRICULTURE INDUSTRY.................................................................... 20 

2.1. OVERVIEW OF THE LOW-CODE SOLUTIONS IN AGRICULTURE..20 

2.2. DESIGN OF THE INTERVIEW WITH INDUSTRY PROFESSIONALS26 

2.3. INTERVIEWS RESULTS........................................................................... 30 

2.4. DESIGN OF THE SURVEY AMONG SMES AND FARMERS.............. 39 

2.5. SURVEY RESULTS................................................................................... 46 

CHAPTER 3. LCDP PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT AND COST 

EVALUATION....................................................................................................... 56 

3.3. PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT............................................................... 56 

3.3. COST ESTIMATION AND ECONOMIC EFFECT.................................. 70 

CONCLUSION...................................................................................................... 76 

REFERENCES...................................................................................................... 79 

APPENDIX.............................................................................................................85 

APPENDIX 1. INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPT.................................................... 85 

APPENDIX 2. SURVEY TRANSCRIPT.......................................................... 88 

2 

 
INTRODUCTION 

Environmental changes have become an issue these days. Due to the shifts 

in  the  natural  lifecycle  people  are  adapting  to  the  new  way  of  surviving  in  the 

changing  world.  Environmental changes have become an issue these days. Due to 

the shifts in the natural lifecycle people are adapting to the new way of surviving in 

the  transforming  world.  It  is  predicted  that  water  demand  will  be  bigger  than 

supply by 40% in 2030, according to the United Nations (Down to Earth, 2023).  

The  agricultural  sector  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  least  digitalized 

industries,  despite  being  one  of  the  most  important.  The  technological  adoption 

rate  is  assessed  for  39%  on  average  (Amoussouhoui  R.  et  al.,  2024).  Also  it  is 

stated as the most vulnerable business since it depends on the weather and natural 

conditions.  It  is  especially  true  for  Russia,  where  the  digitalization  index  for 

agriculture is in 8th place, accounting for 27.2, compared to 75.5 for the top 1 the 

United States.  

Small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  and  farmers  are  mostly  afraid  of 

increased  price  inputs  (48%)  but  the  decreased  yields  due  to the water scarcity is 

the  major  issue  as  well  (21%).  Despite  the  upcoming  shortage,  40%  or  0.8 

quadrillion gallons of the water utilized in agriculture is wasted (UNESCO, 2024). 

Companies  are  ready  to  implement  innovation,  but  only  more  than  a  half  are 

currently using or eager to adopt at least 1 piece of technology, but 49% are ready 

to implement sustainable practices to diminish production costs (McKinsey, 2024).  

Since  software  development  in  the  agricultural  sector  requires  a  lot  of 

resources  it  is  more  convenient  to  use  low-code  development  platforms  as  an 

innovative  approach  for  solution  construction,  enabling  enterprises  to  design  and 

deploy  required  systems  more  efficiently  by  reducing  reliance  on  extensive 

programming expertise. My research aim is to develop the prototype of the LCDP 

to  digitalize  the  water  irrigation  management  system  for  Russian  agricultural 

SMEs.  

To achieve this goal I consider the following tasks as the objectives: 

3 

 
 
1.  Investigation  of 

the 

theoretical  background  on 

the 

low-code 

technology, latest trends and opportunities. 

2.  Review  of  the  existing water management solutions, analysis of their 

performance and metrics collection. 

3.  Qualitative  data  collection:  conducting  semi-structured  interviews 

with  the  industry  professional  to  gain  insights  on  the  industry  to 

contribute to the future solution on the low-code.  

4.  Quantitative  data  collection:  conducting  a  survey  which  involves 

farmers  to  assess  their  needs,  digital  literacy  level  and  readiness  for 

technologies adoption, adjusting the features of the future solution on 

the low-code.  

5.  Create  use  cases,  architecture  of  the  solution,  UX/UI  prototype  to 

develop an MVP and estimate the cost and economic effect. 

The subject is the development of the low-code development platform used 

for  digitalization,  corresponding  to  the  needs  of  the  agricultural  industry.  The 

object  is  the  process  of agricultural industry digitalization in the rapidly changing 

world. 

I  will  utilize  both  the  qualitative  and  the  quantitative  research  method  to 

gather  the  primary  data.  As for the former, I am going to conduct semi-structured 

interviews  with  one  of  the  key  stakeholders,  the  industry  professionals  and 

specialists  involved  in  the  operational  processes.  During  this  stage  I  intend  to 

outline  the  major  problems  in  today's  agriculture,  acknowledge  the  resource 

management,  specifically  the  water  one,  recognize  needs  and  perspective  on  the 

industry to contribute to the future solution on the low-code. As for the latter,  

Considering  the  threats  and  opportunities,  I  will  design  a  management 

system  to  monitor  and  control  water  supply  to  crops,  utilizing  the  Russian 

low-code  platform.  There  is  a  need  for  technological  advancement  and  the 

endeavour  to  contribute  to  it  is  fostered.  Developing  the  standardized  system  I 

hope  to  outline  capabilities  for  Russian  small  and  medium  farmers  to  adopt  a 

4 

 
scalable,  state-financed  and  efficient  solution for them to tackle one of the issues, 

enhancing the agricultural sector. 

There is a practical novelty of the research, which includes the potential to 

decrease water waste, enhance efficient usage and decrease cost production for the 

enterprises, contributing to the national technological development.  

I will have several chapters to comprehend all my findings and structure it 

into a coherent and cohesive way.  

Chapter  1  is  the  literature  review.  I  am  going  to  present  the  trending 

low-code  software  development  approach  as  an  appropriate  solution  for 

agriculture,  considering 

the  situation 

these  days.  To  do  so  the  history, 

characteristics  and  justification  will  be  presented when defining the phenomenon. 

It is also devoted to observing the written works and different researches within the 

topic,  highlighting  the  most  significant  trends  and  vectors  of  development.  The 

relevance  will  be  outlined  to  prove  the  emergency  of  the  issue  and  need  to 

undertake actions to tackle the global challenges.  

Chapter  2.  This  sector  is  devoted  to  Research  design.  To  start  with,  key 

stakeholders  and  already  developed  solutions  should  be mentioned to identify the 

existing  gaps.  And  then,  based  on  the information, the semi-structured interviews 

with hypothesis outlining and a survey will be designed. In the final major chapter. 

I will provide the key results of my research. There will be the insights themselves 

and numeric data, reflecting the answers on the designed questions in the previous 

block.  The  coding  and  analysis  of  the  themes  will  be  approaches  to  structure the 

qualitative data. 

Chapter  3.  Finally,  I  am  going  to  develop  the  architecture  of the solution, 

based  on  the  results,  and  the  actual  prototype  of  the  LCDP.  In  addition,  the 

predicted costs and revenue will be calculated as a part of the economic effect from 

the proposed digital solution.  

5 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND OF THE LOW-CODE 
TECHNOLOGY 

1.1. DEFINITION AND KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LOW-CODE 

TECHNOLOGY 

Originally, the software development process consists of several stages and 

requires  resources  such  as  time,  money,  labour,  specific  knowledge  and  coding 

skills. Increased demand in advanced technologies drives businesses to choose the 

more  optimal  development  approaches.  Next  generation  software  development 

aims  at  increasing  the  process  efficiency  across  each  stage  of  development  and 

software  quality  by  implementing  more  advanced  tools,  including  AI-based 

development  and 

testing,  automated  code  review  and 

low-code/no-code 

instruments. 

Visual development services like Microsoft Access and Visual Basic in the 

1980s have started shifting the preference from hard-code exploitation deployment 

to the more flexible and graphical domain (Parimi S. K. K., 2025). The concept of 

low-code  development firstly emerged in the early 2000s. However, the definition 

of  exactly  “low-code”  was  officially  introduced  in  2014  by  Forrester  Clay 

Richardson and John R. Rymer in the report “New Development Platforms Emerge 

For  Customer-Facing  Applications”,  where  the  researchers  were  examining  the 

company's  vector  for  new  perspectives  on  rapid,  continuous  and  Test-And-Learn 

delivery.  Low-code  alternatives  were  described  as 

the 

type  of  software 

development  approach  that  suppose  application  creation with minimal knowledge 

and  skills  of  hand-coding.  Authors  consider  faster  delivery  as  the  preliminary 

benefit for the firms as well as quick answers to the customer feedback after initial 

release.  

There  are  two  quite  different  substitutional  phenomena:  low-code  and 

no-code, forming the common designation LCNC. In accordance with their names, 

the  first  concept  means  little  technical  knowledge  and  is  suitable  for  the  more 

6 

 
 
 
experienced developers, meanwhile the second does not require it at all (Vera C. G. 

M.  et  al.,  2022).  The  benefits  of  the  low-code  in comparison with the no-code as 

the  former  could  arrange  more  complex  solutions  like  these  requiring  integration 

with  legacy  systems  of  customisation  because  of  the  possibility  of  manual  code 

modifying.  Low-code  is  preferred  when  the  enterprise  wants  to  boost  the 

development  process  but  still  have  some  technical  control  over  the  logic  and 

infrastructure.  The  no-code  capabilities  are  limited  and  are  more  appropriate  for 

the  standard  solutions.  In  my  research  I  will  focus  on  the  low-code  as  the  more 

prominent approach but in some contexts they could interchange with each other or 

be described as a whole phenomenon LCNC.  

In terms of LCNC approach the “citizen developers” emerged. Notably, the 

origins  of  the  phenomenon  is  traced  in  the  1980s  from  the  concept  of  end-user 

development,  standing  for  the  set  of  practices  that  allow  non-professional 

developers system users to make corrections of the system elements (Lieberman H. 

et  al.,  2006).  The  adoption of the Microsoft Excel is the prime example of citizen 

development. Officially, the term was introduced by Gartner in 2014 as individuals 

who create and expand the application capabilities via the instruments restricted by 

the  IT  unit.  Forrester  characterized  them  like  business  experts,  delivering 

applications via the non-coding tools.  

These days the number of citizen developers is rising not only among small 

businesses, but across different sizes of entities (Lebens M. et al., 2021), indicating 

the  attempt  to  tackle  the  issue  of  developer  shortage.  Roughly  87%  of 

organizations  globally  are  facing  the  professionals  shortage,  which  could  be  the 

main  reason for the business disruption according to the 71% of CEOs worldwide 

(de  Souza  A.  C. M. et al., 2024). The skill gap might happen primarily due to the 

inconsistency of academic knowledge, obtained during education, and rapid market 

change  due  to the fast speed of technological growth (Diniz W. et al., 2024). That 

is why more and more companies are shifting towards citizen developers, utilizing 

the  LCNC  approach, 

to  minimize  risks  of  specialist 

incompetence  and 

resource-consuming additional teaching issues, contributing to better efficiency.  

7 

 
The  special  services  on  which the low-code solutions are being developed 

are  called  low-code  development  platforms  or  LCDP.  The  platform  emerged 

roughly in the 2010s and is described as a cloud-base platform with in-built visual 

modular  components  on  the  interface  with  which  a  user  could  interact,  dragging 

and  connecting  tools,  to  deploy  the final system with minimal coding (Kenneweg 

B.  et  al.,  2021).  Thus,  the  platform  functionality  is  named  drag-and-drop,  where 

elements of the interface can be operated manually via the cursor (Parimi S. K. K., 

2025).  

According to the interviews with experts, conducted by McKinsey in 2022, 

LCDP  comprises  scalability  via  components  reuse,  facilitating  the  standardized 

tools  and  processes,  and  accelerated  solution  deployment  with  help  of 

plug-and-play  software  elements.  The  solution  is  closely  aligned  to  the  business 

objectives  since 

the 

technical  requirements  are  brought 

to 

the  business 

departments.  LCDP  implies  automated  model  deployment  straight  into  the viable 

applications with augmented control and maintenance for performance degradation 

diminish. The extended LCDP capabilities are demonstrated in Figure 1. Although 

the  feature  range  is typically common, it is important to note that each LCDP has 

its own set of instruments, which vary from platform to platform, depending on the 

development aim.  

8 

 
Figure 1. Feature diagram of LCDP and the identified sub-features in the primary studies. 

Source: Guresci E. et al. 

The key benefits of the low-code includes reducing associated development 

costs by 52% (CodeEpsilon, 2023) and development time up to 90% (McKinsey & 

Company,  2022).  IT  professionals  believe  low-code  positively  boosts  digital 

innovation  and  transformation,  protect  businesses  from  Technology  churn  (losing 

9 

 
 
old customers and acquire new one over time), raising responsiveness, and because 

of  the  pre-built  elements  and  visual  interfaces  the  low-code  software  approach 

enhances  the  development  process  and  decreases  dependency  on  the  technically 

skillful  developers  as  a  major  social  impact,  involving  citizen  developers  instead 

(Alsaadi H. A. et al., 2021).  

Additionally,  the  survey by Microsoft demonstrated that 89% of CIOs and 

IT  professionals  say  low-code  is  effective  in  increasing  efficiency.  Also  the 

findings claim that respondents agreed on the important role of the low-code in the 

application  modernization  (87%),  said  the  approach  is  helpful  to  reduce  costs 

(87%) and found it contributing to the more accurate insights (87%). The example 

outlined is the case study of the PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), referred to as the 

London-based multinational professional service network or international audit and 

consulting  corporation,  which  developed  the  Cyber  Technology  Rationalizer 

solution  in  6  weeks, using low-code. The company was shifting from their legacy 

system  to  the  more  scalable  and  flexible  solution  for  internal  and  external  users. 

Via  the  Microsoft  Power  Platform  PwC  developed  a  multitenant  enterprise 

decision  support  website,  which  is  estimated  to  save  cost  and  time  by  85%  and 

30%, respectively since its implementation (Microsoft, 2023). 

Next  generation  software  development,  including  low-code  platforms  and 

AI-enabled  project  management tools and cloud architecture converge, has been a 

digital  trend  for  a  while.  In  the  latest  Technology  Trends  Outlook  2024  by 

McKinsey  there  is  a  $17  billion  equity  investment  in  the  trend,  peaking  over  the 

past 5 years. The low-code approach is called a game-changer for many industries, 

especially  when  businesses  need  to  innovate,  building  software  solutions  with 

greater  speed  but  smaller  cost.  Besides  other  promising  software  development 

approaches,  low-code  could  be  implemented  on  each  stage  of  the  software 

development: planning and analysis, architecture design, development and coding, 

testing,  deployment  and  maintenance.  Meanwhile,  other  technologies  affect  only 

one  stage  of the life cycle. This factor put them in an unfavourable position when 

10 

 
competing  on  the  market,  compared  with  the  low-code  approach  (McKinsey  & 

Company, 2022). The more detailed data is presented in Figure 2. 

Figure 2. Next generation software development tools and its utilization across each stage of the 

software development life cycle. Source: McKinsey & Company. 

The perspective of innovation is rather promising. According to Forrester’s 

survey  from  2024,  87%  of  enterprise  developers  use  low-code  development 

platforms for at least some of their development work. As for the market size it is 

forecasted to reach $65 billion by 2027 and $187 billion by 2030 with a Compound 

annual growth rate (CAGR) of 31.1% for 2020 - 2030 (Mad Devs, 2024).    

1.2. LOW-CODE PERSPECTIVES IN THE AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY 

Many  industries  are  already  adopting  low-code  technology,  such  as  the 

financial  sector,  healthcare  insurance  and  retail.  The  choice  of  implementation  in 

these  industries  is  justified  by  miscellaneous  limitations  and  regulations,  varying 

from  region  to  region,  but  a  need  for a highly personalized solution with fast and 

flexible  pace  of  designing,  meeting  evolving  customer  preferences  (McKinsey  & 

Company,  2022).  The  agricultural  sector  has  a  tendency  to  integrate  new 

technologies as well.  

In  the  digitalization  of  agriculture  the  key technologies, used together, are 

cloud  computing  and  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  with  the  big  amount  of  data 

retrieved from farm operational processes (Rotz S. et al., 2019). Nowadays farmers 

11 

 
 
 
 
actively  implement  intellectual  monitoring  systems,  global  positioning  systems 

(GPS),  smart  control,  remote  sensors,  analysing  and  planning  tools,  essential  to 

collect  data  on  the  farm  to  manage  processes  more  efficiently  (Wolfert  et  al., 

2017).  Furthermore,  digital  and  cloud-powered  accounting  and  software  for 

management  and  decision-making  are  adopted  by  various  enterprises  of  all sizes, 

claiming  innovation  to  save  resources  and  enhance  the  overall quality (Rotz S. et 

al., 2019).  

The  term  Digital  Agriculture  Technology  or  DAT  was  introduced  as  a 

generalized  phenomenon,  describing  the  all  discovered  and  upcoming  innovation 

in the relative sector (Amoussouhoui R. et al., 2024). Via DAT the smart farming is 

being  cultivated,  resulting  in  bringing  more  value  to  the  farmers.  The  potential 

benefits are profit rise, cost shrink, risk diminish, reliability and accuracy improve, 

administrative  surveillance  lessen,  meanwhile  boosting  consumer  acceptance  and 

increasing product quality (Walter A. et al., 2017).  

With  the  integration  of  different  DATs  the  adoption  rates  have  risen 

recently.  Various  projects  on  the  service-based  business  and  infrastructure 

development, leading to the more farmers having access to the basic facilities like 

electricity  and  mobile  phones,  and  increased  farmer’s  willingness  and  positive 

attitude towards change have affected the implementation index growth. According 

to a last year paper, with 52 studies with 32400 participants included, the adoption 

rate  of  the technologies in agriculture accounted for 39%, being the highest in the 

developing countries in Africa and South America (Amoussouhoui R. et al., 2024). 

Still,  the  overall  number  is  relevantly  low,  especially  comparing  with  the  more 

technologically advanced sectors, banking, financial service or insurance.  

Some  findings  suggest  in  2024  the  amount  of  farmers  who  are  not  only 

using  at  least  1  piece  of  technology  but  are  eager  to  adopt  at  least  1  piece  of 

technology  globally  is  52%,  which  is  3%  larger  than  in  2022  (McKinsey  & 

Company, 2024).  

Still, the level of digitalization is low, as a consequence of present barriers: 

lack of ICT skills, financial support and advanced infrastructure (Amoussouhoui R. 

12 

 
et  al.,  2024).  Farmers  are  struggling  to  implement  innovations  due  to  the  costs 

(58.2%),  complexity  and  specific  knowledge  required  (50.1%)  and  lack  of 

adaptation  for  small-scale  businesses  (46.5%).  Also  37%  of  respondents  are  not 

aware of the existing solutions to integrate (Giagnocavo et al, 2025).  

The further major issue is that the digital technologies developed so far are 

mostly integrated by big and rich enterprises, targeting specifically their needs. The 

more  powerful  parties  are  reshaping  the  market,  according  to  their  interest, 

negatively  impacting  the  small and medium-sized farmers. Understanding the key 

three  dimensions,  data  ownership  and  control,  technologies  development, 

cybersecurity  the  more  equal  and  conscientious  development  would  be  possible, 

regarding size (Rotz S. et al., 2019).  

The  processes  of  agriculture  in  each  stage  from  planting  the  seed  to 

delivering  the  ready  product  to  the  shop  are  diverse  and  have  their  own 

peculiarities  important  to  consider.  The  adoption  of  low-code  technology  into 

agriculture  could  definitely  boost  the  industry.  Low-code,  a cloud-based solution, 

is possible to transform the classical software development in the respective sector, 

bringing  the  required  simplification  and  efficiency  to  the  industry.  Analysing  the 

collected  data  via  the  special  IoT  sensors, also widely implemented innovation in 

agriculture,  and  further  automation  will  speed  up  the  process  of  decision-making 

regarding the operational processes, saving resources like time, money and labour. 

Besides,  since  the  majority of farmers are less enlightened regarding digital tools, 

the solution deployed via LCDP would be a more accessible technology. The built 

application  is scalable and as variables change, LCDP provides the adaptability to 

flexibly  manage  the  application,  customizing  it  according  to  the  enterprise 

requests.  In  the  long  run  of  the  wider  adoption  even  business  employees  of  the 

SMEs  in  the  agricultural  sector  could  independently  manage  and  develop  the 

application  further,  adding  necessary  features  when  needed  without  technical 

assistance. Last but not least, the built solution is scalable (Guresci E. et al., 2024).  

As  for  restrictions,  LCDP  still  suggests  less  variety  than  the  traditional 

software  development due to the restricted capabilities. The issue of compatibility 

13 

 
with  integrated  tracking  hardware  like  IoT  sensors  may  limit  the  application 

efficiency.  Also  the  specific  logic  of  the  solution,  oriented  on  the  agriculture 

domain  and  considering  biological and geological knowledge related to the plants 

growth.  This  way  the  future  system  should  contain  user-friendly  simplicity  and 

proper  advancement  for  the  management  SMEs  operational  process.  Another 

crucial  challenge  is  the  vendor  lock-in.  The  migration  of  the  developed  on  the 

LCDP solution might be complicated due the compliance issues. Studies show that 

60%  of  LCNC  users  prove  the  difficulties  when  placing  applications  to  the  new 

environment,  affecting  the  maintenance  worries  growth  (Upadhyaya  N.,  2023). 

The  high  dependency  of  the  farms  on  the  vendors  may  restrict  the  long  run 

progress,  limiting  opportunities.  Assuming  the  risks, the SMEs have to be careful 

when choosing a vendor for the solution development, meanwhile cultivating their 

own  specialists  or  attracting  citizen  developers  to  maintain  the solution, as it was 

mentioned before.  

1.3. TOPIC JUSTIFICATION. GLOBAL RELEVANCE OF WATER 

SHORTAGE 

The  farmers  top  concerns  include  increased  price  of  inputs  (48%)  and 

extreme weather or climate events (41%). Additionally, one of the biggest farmer’s 

issues  was  connected  to  the  water  scarcity.  In  2024 there was an increase by 1%, 

from 20% to 21%, in the concern of decreased yields due to the water scarcity over 

the span of two years (McKinsey & Company, 2024). 

Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO)  says  agriculture  consumes 

roughly  72%  of  the  freshwater  which  is  over  2  quadrillion  gallons  or  7.57 

quadrillion  litres  of  water  annually.  40%  (0.8  quadrillion  gallons  or  3.03 

quadrillion  litres)  of  what  is  wasted  because  of  inadequate  irrigation  systems, 

evaporation and poor water management as well (UNESCO, 2024).  

Even  though the amount of food produced increased more than twice over 

the  last  30  years,  by  2050  approximately 50% of food will be needed to meet the 

14 

 
 
 
demand of the growing population with modified dietary habits through the years. 

Rapid increment of the food required, mixed with the unfavourable climate change 

in  the  water  cycle,  would result in a strong need for improved water management 

in the agricultural sector (UNESCO, 2024).  

President of the 77th United Nations (UN) General Assembly Csaba Kőrösi 

claimed  at  press  conference  before  the  UN  Water  Conference  in  2023  that  the 

world  is  facing  with  water  crisis,  when  in  the  near  future  the demand is going to 

prevail  over  supply  by  40%  in  2030  due  to  the  disruption  of  the  water  cycle 

balance caused by the human activity (Down to Earth, 2023). The most vulnerable 

areas to the water crisis are located in the dry and hot regions, close to the equator. 

The  territory  of  Southwest  Asia  and North Africa, countries like Kuwait or Saudi 

Arabia  which  withdrew  the  available  resource  more  than  38  and  10  times, 

respectively. There is a detailed map in Figure 3. However, according to the current 

tendency,  the  issues  could  affect  the  northern  regions  in  the  long  run  as  well, 

despite  their  huge  water  resources.  The  territories  of Central and East Asia are in 

the zone of moderate risk, but some countries are more prone to water scarcity, like 

Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Pakistan and South Korea, respectively. 

Figure 3. Next generation software development tools and its utilization across each stage of the 

software development life cycle. Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 

Nations 

15 

 
 
“Turning the Tide: A Collective Call to Action”, the report published by the 

GCEW highlights the urgent steps, planned to be undertaken by the UN to prevent 

the possible shortage, moving steadily to water security. One of the key points was 

plans  of  the  countries’  governments  to  take  initiatives  to  regulate  the  policies, 

aiming  to  cope  with  the  upcoming  crisis.  The  annual  $700  billion  agriculture 

subsidies  are  discussed  to  be  cut  out  in  order  to  stem  the  excessive  water 

consumption  by  the  farms  and  related  enterprises  (Global  Commission  on  the 

Economics of Water, 2023). And such regulations could lead to the struggles in the 

industry  connected  to  the  increased  water  price  due  to  the  supply  diminish  and 

investment  cut,  and  at  the  same  time  making  them  move  towards  water  resource 

consciousness. 

The minority of crop, approximately 34%, produced is irrigated or watered 

via  special  irrigation  devices,  not  naturally,  and  they  are  more  vulnerable  to 

competing  water  demand  (WRI,  2024).  However,  irrigated  yields  tend  to  be 

30-100%  higher compared to adjacent rainfed areas (UNESCO, 2024). Due to the 

climate change 60% of these irrigated crops are in the high or extreme water stress 

areas, compared to the 8% for the rainfed crops (WRI, 2024).  

Studies  show  that  farmers  are  interested  in  improving  productivity  and 

adding  revenue  streams.  They  are  eager  to  adopt  sustainable  practices  due  to 

several  factors,  but one of the main reasons is lower cost production with roughly 

49%  on  average  of  farmers  claiming  it  over  the  four  key  regions,  Europe,  North 

and Latin America, India (McKinsey & Company, 2024). 

1.4. CURRENT SITUATION IN RUSSIAN AGRICULTURE 

The  agricultural  sector  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  least  digitalized 

industries,  despite  being  one  of  the  most  important.  Also  it  is  stated  as  the  most 

vulnerable  business  since  it  depends  on  the  weather  and  natural  conditions.  It  is 

especially  true  for  Russia,  where  the  digitalization  index  for  agriculture  is  in  8th 

place,  accounting  for  27.2,  compared  to  75.5  for  the  top  1  on  the list, the United 

16 

 
 
 
States.  The  numbers  reflect  the  positive  outcomes:  the  U.S.  farmers  via  smart 

farming  improve  yields  by  5-10%  while  reducing  costs  by  15-20%  (Yakov  & 

Partners, 2023). The more detailed ranking might be found in Figure 4.  

Figure 4. Agriculture digitalization by countries. Source: Yakov & Partners.  

Russia  currently  faces  challenges  in  the respective sector. In 2024 its total 

grain  harvest  declined  by 14% from record harvest of 155 million tons in 2023 to 

125  million  tons,  reflecting  poor  worsen  weather  conditions  and  problems  in 

access  to  high-quality  seed,  farm  equipment  and  labor  shortage.  Specifically,  the 

key crop for the Russian economy, wheat, witnessed a 16% drop to 82 million tons 

(BOFIT, 2025).  

By 2026, it is expected that the growth of digital technologies in agriculture 

in  Russia  will  be  5  times,  including  through  the  support  of  agrotechnological 

startups  (Beksultanova  et  al,  2023).  According  to the Analytical Center under the 

Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  expectations,  digital  technologies  will 

increase  yields  by  15-20%.  The  innovation  integration  by  2030  may  result  in 

boosting  labor  productivity  by  15.6%  (cumulative  total),  production  volume 

increase  up  to  5%,  depending  on  the  enterprise  type,  costs  decrease  by  5-20%, 

possibly generating an additional ₽800 billion annually (Yakov & Partners, 2023). 

Among  the  most  popular  solutions  are  decision  support  systems,  applications  for 

precision agriculture and management systems.  

The  initiatives  are  affected  by  the  uncertain  geopolitical  situation  and  the 

imposed sanctions on Russia due to the conflicts in the global area, started in 2014 

and  reinforced  in  2022.  Hence,  most  of  the  profound  digital  solutions  are  not 

17 

 
 
available,  especially  the  latest  and  the  most  fundamental  one.  The  major 

international  companies like John Deere (machinery and farm equipment), AGCO 

(agricultural  machinery  and  precision  technologies,  including  smart  irrigation), 

Caterpillar  (machinery  and  farm  equipment),  Trimble  (GPS-based  equipment and 

software  processing  tools)  suspended  over  the  first  half  of  2022,  primarily  in 

February, March and April (The Washington Post, 2022). Large companies leaving 

the  Russian  market  increased  a  technological  gap  and  stagnated  the  further 

evolution in the sector.  

Thus,  the  government  actively  subsidizes  local  software  development  to 

boost  the  yields  within  restricted  capabilities.  One  of  the  key  constraints  is 

definitely limited access to innovations and absence of the advanced decisions yet. 

This is why initiative influences mostly large entities, proving the heterogeneity of 

technological  adoption.  Like  in  the  foreign  country,  only  25-30%  small  and 

medium  enterprises  (SME) 

in  Russia  have  already 

implemented  digital 

technologies  compared  to  90%  rate  inside  the  big-scale  companies  based  on  the 

data of the Russian Ministry of Agriculture (RBC, 2024).  

1.5. RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS 

Analysing  the  data,  there  are  three  key  stakeholders  which  might  be 

engaged  and  interested  in  the  irrigation  management  system:  SMEs  and  farmers 

and the Russian government.  

The  first  one  has  a  straightforward  interest  in  the  technological initiatives 

as  the  direct  customer  of  the  solution  who  aims  to  enhance  the  efficient  water 

consumption,  diminishing  associated  costs.  SMEs  have  restricted  capabilities, 

therefore,  it  is  more  difficult  for  them  to  adopt  new  technologies.  Last  year  the 

Russian  Central  Bank  raised  the  key  rate  for  the  historical  maximum  of  21%, 

which  negatively  affected  the  opportunity  to  loan  money. Also in the last decade, 

although  the  agro-industrial  complex  (AIC)  received  some  government  support, 

major  changes  in  development  have  not  happened. The import substitution is one 

18 

 
 
 
the early stages as the quality of national technologies are way lower, there are still 

a  small  number  of  the  professionals  employed  in  agriculture  and the transition to 

smart  agriculture  is in process. There is no systematic scientific and technological 

support for the SMEs, which is leading to less production. Farms are producing no 

more  than  15%  of  all  agriculture  products,  but  the  numbers  in  the  developing 

countries  could  be  up  to  80%.  This  all  indicates  the  absence  of  stimulus  and 

potential for sustainable progress (Dudin M. N. et al., 2022).  

Demand  in  the  local  software  is  a  big  opportunity  for  developing  the 

IT-solution, especially with the help of different government initiatives. Due to the 

new  reality,  transformed  via  external  global  politics,  the  Russian  government has 

started  to  actively  invest  in  the  agriculture  sector  again,  moving  to  the  digital 

advancement  of  one  of  the  most  important  sectors  for  the  national economy. The 

one  of  the  latest  subsidiary  is  dated  in  August  2024 and was accounted for about 

₽3  billion  allocation  for  the  digital  transformation  of  the  AIC.  The  actions  are 

aimed  to  digitize  the  industry  by  75%  by  2027.  And  the  value  taken  should 

contribute  to  a  27%  increase  in  exports  of  AIC  products  by  2030,  up  to  $55.2 

billion (RBC, 2024).  

19 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH DESIGN OF LOW-CODE UTILIZATION IN 

THE AGRICULTURE INDUSTRY 

2.1. OVERVIEW OF THE LOW-CODE SOLUTIONS IN AGRICULTURE 

To  identify  the  research  gap  and  understand  the available solutions on the 

both  global  and  the  national  market  I  searched  for  and  analyzed  a  few  low-code 

and  cloud  based  systems,  offering  smart  irrigation  for enterprises of any size. All 

of the examples are of U. S. origin, which is not surprising at all since they are the 

most technologically advanced in the agricultural sector with 75.5 index (Yakov & 

Partners, 2023).  

The  solutions on the conscious water distribution in the global agricultural 

industry are Smart Rain, WaterBit and Smart Irrigation.  

Smart Rain 

The  American  cloud-based  technology  Smart  Rain  is  a  smart  watering 

system,  combining  automation  with  prediction.  The  Smart  Rain  system  assumes 

miscellaneous  features,  helpful  for  farmers  to  manage  their  irrigation wisely. The 

SmartApp™ with The SmartController™ is an application, available on Androids, 

iOS and desktop. Smart sensors gather data from the soil and send it directly to the 

system.  The  technology  tracks  the  local  weather  condition,  soil  state  and  current 

evapotranspiration rates (i. e. how quickly the water is going to evaporate from the 

soil)  to  determine  the  exact  amount  of  water  the plant needs and adjust the water 

resources  for any given day. The inbuilt map allows the user to track the watering 

zones  and  watering  sites,  managing  the  irrigation for the particular area. It is also 

possible  to  receive  reports  with  detailed  description  of  the  system  activity  with 

statistics  on 

the 

saved 

resources.  Smart  Rain  even  uses  predictive 

evapotranspiration to calculate the water schedule up to the 4 following days. And 

the user gets notifications on their device on the turning on of the irrigation system, 

proposed changes in the schedule and real time data.  

20 

 
 
 
This  way  the  water  bills  might  be  reduced  by  35%  with  the  saving  of  7 

million  gallons  (26.5  million  litres)  of  water  and  of  23%  labour  costs  could  be 

decreased as well. 

WaterBit  

Vantiq is a LCDP that enables solutions for different industries: healthcare, 

energy, public safety and cybersecurity. Besides major successful implementations 

by digitally advanced sectors, there is a case study of the adoption in agriculture.  

Leveraging  Vantiq  low-code  platform,  WaterBit  developed  a  real-time 

water  delivery  and  management  system  to  optimize  irrigation  practices.  At  first, 

WaterBit  was  trying  to  deploy  their  own  system  to  improve  the  smart  sensors 

network  performance.  However,  the  company  lacks  flexible  architecture  for  the 

desired  scalable  solution.  Hence,  via  low-code  development  tools  WaterBit 

achieved flexibility and scalability of the future application. The enterprise did not 

change  the  initial  variant  but  re-built  the  same  system  with  necessary feature set. 

Finally, WaterBit rapidly deployed a scaling solution across extensive farmland. It 

enables precise monitoring and control of water usage, promising 40% reduction in 

water  usage.  Besides  water  saving,  it  promises to diminish up to 5% in green gas 

emission.  The  water  management  system  tracks  the  soil  moisture,  evaluating  its 

condition through the various IoT sensors, and executes remote watering with high 

accuracy.  From  these  sensors  the  data  is  transmitted  for  the  further  analysis  to 

determine  turn-on  and  turn-off  of  the  irrigation  for  the  specific  block,  enabling 

schedule.  Data  is  stored  in  the  cloud,  accessible  for  the  users  to  make  next 

decisions.  The  WaterBit  system  offers  tools  for  visualization  and  dashboard 

creation for data representation.  

Smart Irrigation 

Another  notable  cloud-based  system  is  the  Smart  Irrigation,  which  was 

developed  through  a  collaboration  between  the  University  of  Georgia  and  the 

University  of  Florida  and  the  application  is  available  for  Android  and  iOS.  The 

different  applications  are  supposed for different plants: strawberry, corn, avocado, 

different vegetables and more. It was initially implemented in Georgia. Despite its 

21 

 
favourable  climate  and  abundance  of  water  resources  (e.  g.  rain)  and  resilient 

aquifers  the  initiative  was  introduced  for  the  wise  usage  in  the  unstable  times  to 

less burden on the next generations.  

Smart  Irrigation  suggests  miscellaneous  products  and  systems,  including 

gunshots  and  center  pivot  system  with  GPS  tracking.  But  the  most  notable  is  its 

monitoring  system  with  IoT  sensors.  The  key  feature  of  the  solution  is  remote 

control  of  the  irrigation system via mobile devices. It allows the user to turn it on 

and  off,  set  a  timer,  correct  direction  and  intensity  of  the  water  flow,  control  the 

degree  and  angle.  By  utilizing  soil  moisture  sensors,  they  provide  real-time 

irrigation  scheduling  based  on  crop-specific  needs,  decreasing  water  usage  by 

15%.  The  application  predicts  weather  and  suggests  irrigation  recommendations 

based  on  the  plants  needs.  Also  the notification is enabled to warn about whether 

the  water  supply  is  needed.  In  comparison  with  the  previous  solutions,  Smart 

Irrigation  is  open  about  their  price  range.  The  price  varies  from  just  adjusting 

simple  sensors,  costing  less  than  $100,  with  a  free  mobile  app  for  a  simple 

approach  to  more  sophisticated  systems  that  include  telemetry,  letting  farmers 

access the soil moisture data from anywhere with a range from $900 to $4,000.  

Russian technologies 

Smart Mole’s 

As  for  the  Russian  technologies,  Smart  Mole’s  system  by  PolivTorg  is  a 

professional  system 

for  water  management 

in  agriculture.  It  combines 

SmartCapillarity  and  SmartRoot  patented  sensor  technologies  to  monitor  the 

capillary movement of water and assess the state of the soil as for the former and in 

real  time  divide  the  roots  by  the  areas  and  determine  the  effective  root  zone  of 

plants, where 70-80% of water is used, as for the latter.  

Smart Mole’s is presented in three packages, depending on each customer's 

needs.  Starting  with  the  first  and  the  smallest  one,  the  system  is just the distance 

control  up  to  15  km  with  local  and  cloud  storage  of  data  to  analyze.  The  sensor 

SmartValve  is  the  one  responsible  for  the  remote  monitoring.  The  second  is  the 

more  extended  package,  which  assumes  tracking  the  capillary  movement  and 

22 

 
effective root zone besides the already mentioned function in the previous one. It is 

their  outstanding  technologies  SmartCapillarity  and  SmartRoot  sensors  that  are 

connected  to  the  second  bundle.  Also  the  customer  may  count  on  the  distance 

technological  customer  support  if  any  casualties  happen.  Finally,  the  most 

upgraded  package  comprises  AI,  contributing  to  the  decision  making.  The  future 

water  irrigation  program  is  prognosed  and  built  based  on  the  analyzed  data  from 

smart sensors to enhance the efficient distribution, saving resources.  

Smart  Mole’s  ensures  precise  irrigation  management,  saving  water  and 

increasing  crop  yields.  Its  key  benefits  include  precise  irrigation  control, keeping 

nutrients within the effective root zone, labor costs reduction and improved overall 

efficiency  because  of  the  AI  and  wireless  automation  introduction,  and  real-time 

data analysis in one application for farmers to adjust irrigation strategies.  

Knowledge Space 

Knowledge Space is the LCDP, which is included in the Unified Register of 

Russian  Programs  for  Electronic  Computers  and  Databases.  It  is  proclaimed  as 

top-1  IBM  platform  in  2024 by CNews, top-2 in SCP decisions rating in 2024 by 

Skolkovo, top-5 in low-code platforms in 2024 by Skolkovo and TAdviser. Via the 

platform more than 90 projects executed, including 6 Intellectual Property Patents. 

The key partners are big IT and consulting companies like Axenix, Zyfra, KROK, 

Smart  Architects,  Enterchain,  Bright  and  more.  Also  they  cooperate  with 

prestigious universities such as MSU, HSE and MEPhi. The outstanding clients are 

Gazprom  (including  subsidiaries e. g. Gazprom Neft, Gazprom Drilling), Rosneft, 

Lukoil, Nornickel, DHL, Integra and even the Moscow Government.  

According to their portfolio, the solutions developed mostly for companies 

in  the  oil  and  gas  sector,  coal  mining  and  food  production  industry.  The  closest 

project  in  agriculture  being  executed  is  the  Budgeting  case  of  the  AIC.  The  key 

functional  underlines  visualisation  of  the  budgeting  methodology,  process 

organization,  consolidation  of  the  budget,  integration  with  external  systems  to 

import  and  export  data.  But  there  are  no  other  cases,  and  no  development  of  the 

water management system.  

23 

 
To analyse the solution I decided to compare and contrast them in the table 

form.  I  summarized  the  gathered  data  regarding  these  technologies  to  understand 

their nature better. As for the metrics, besides the standard descriptive, I decided to 

stress  my  attention  on  the  farmers’  struggles,  outlined  in  the  literature  review  in 

Chapter  1,  and  how  the  solutions  tackle  the  issues.  Additionally, crucial numbers 

are  presented,  which  demonstrate  the  possible  efficiency  of  each  technology  in 

terms of different resources optimization, like water and labour. Also these criteria 

will be evaluated and assessed by further qualitative and quantitative research.  

Table 1. Overview of the existing solutions for irrigation management. 

Smart Rain  WaterBit 

Smart 
Irrigation 

Smart 
Mole’s 

Knowledge 
Space 

Purpose 
and 
description 

Smart 
watering 
system with 
prediction 
algorithm 

Precise 
monitoring 
and control of 
water usage  

Water 
monitoring 
system, 
providing 
schedule 
irrigation 

Precision 
watering 
system 

LCDP for 
delivering 
digital solutions  

Country of 
Origin 

Utilization 
of cloud or 
the LCNC 

Sensors 
integration 

Weather 
API 

Scheduling 
and 
prediction 

the U. S. 

the U. S. 

the U. S. 

Russia 

Russia 

Yes, low-code  Yes, cloud 

Yes, cloud 

Yes, cloud 

Yes, low-code 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

Possible, but no 
actual data 

Yes 

Possible, but no 
actual data 

Technologi
cal base  

Low 
advanced 

Low 
advanced 

Low 
advanced 

Medium 
advanced 

Medium 
advanced 

Technical 
knowledge 
level 
required 

Water 
saving 

Low 

Low 

Low 

Medium 

Low 

35% 

40% 

15% 

25% 

N/D 

24 

 
 
Smart Rain  WaterBit 

Smart 
Irrigation 

Smart 
Mole’s 

Knowledge 
Space 

23% 

30% 

20% 

15-20% 

N/D 

Labour 
savings 

Availability 
in Russia 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Source: compiled by the author 

After  analysing  the  U.  S. major smart irrigation systems I found that most 

of  the  available  ones  are  cloud-based  solutions  which  behave  as  third  parties, 

proposing their own product for the enterprises. Agricultural companies utilize the 

external LCDP or systems to improve the water usage and reduce associated costs. 

However,  as  it  was  described  in  Chapter  1,  there  are  some  risks  with  high 

dependency  on  vendors  which  could  restrict  the  development  capability  and 

potentially diminish the value in the long run.  

As  for  the  literature,  I  had  two  main  scoops  of  data  that  are  basically 

profound information on the low-code technology itself and the agricultural sector 

and  key  issues in the industry. The former includes the fundamental theory on the 

technology,  underlining  its  history  of  origin, key principles, features, benefits and 

limitations.  The  latter  is  for  outlining  the  current  situation  in  the  respective 

industry, including trends, global statistics on the resources and digitalization rates 

and relevant examples.  

I  will  mostly  rely  on  academic  sources  like  articles  in  the  journals  and 

reports  by  major  consulting  agencies  when  describing  the  low-code  concept  in 

agriculture.  Academic  literature  on  technologies  integration  in  the  agricultural 

industry,  comprehensive  literature  review  on  the  phenomenon,  industry  reports, 

studies  on  technology  adoption  among  farmers,  case  studies  from  farmers  using 

digital solutions, their performance statistics.  

As a result of my literature review, I learnt about the nature of the low-code 

and specifically on the LCDP. It is considered as a promising innovation and a 

major approach for future software development. Then, finding more relevant data 

on the technology integration in agriculture, I found out the current situation 

25 

 
 
regarding the digitalization in the sector. I was elaborating on the low technological 

advancement possible, proving my point with the recent studies and research. 

Finally, after a proper area investigation, I could discuss the LCDP adoption in the 

agricultural industries, understanding its advantages and disadvantages.  

The companies are better to develop their own solutions, not relying on any 

vendors.  Due  to  the  lack  of  technological  advancement  of  the  agriculture 

representatives,  the  low-code  approach  seems  to  be  the  most  promising  way  to 

develop the customized solutions, according to each companies needs, meanwhile, 

decreasing  money,  time  and  labor.  As  for  the  Russian  market, there is no data on 

the  cloud  or  low-code  solution  specifically  for  irrigation  management  in  Russian 

agriculture  yet  which  could  potentially  decrease  associated  costs,  contributing  to 

the  water  usage  efficiency  as  well.  Thus,  to  integrate  it  on  the  Russian  market  I 

need  to  gather  insights  in  the  form  of  the  qualitative  data  from  the  respective 

primary source. 

2.2. DESIGN OF THE INTERVIEW WITH INDUSTRY PROFESSIONALS 

Interviews are considered to be the crucial part of my research and the main 

source  to  gain  qualitative  data.  I  will  utilize  the  semi-structured  approach  for  the 

interviews.  The  reasons  for  it  are  the  extended  flexibility  when  talking  with  the 

respondents,  depending on their answers. Besides asking the prepared questions, I 

am  going  to  ask  follow-up  ones.  Thus,  the  dialogue  will  be  more  natural  and 

comfortable  for  the  person  to  share  additional  more  sufficient  details,  helpful  for 

my  research.  The  respondents  I  would  like  to  have  interviews  with  are  the 

professionals  and  specialists  in  the  agriculture  industry  with  different  areas  of 

responsibility.  So  each  interview  will  be  unique, differentiating one from another, 

despite the standard set of questions since I am going to clarify some details in the 

middle of the conversation.  

The  selection  of  the  interviewees  is  based  on  their  competencies.  I  chose 

primarily  operational  managers  who  are  acknowledged  of  the  resource  fund  and 

26 

 
 
 
perspectives  of  the  integrated  digitalization  practices.  The  agriculture  specialists 

have  to  be  experienced  for  their  insights  to  be  valuable.  Moreover,  their  positive 

attitude  towards  my  research  initiative  and  readiness  to  approve  usage  of  their 

information  in  the  thesis  since  I  need  to  publish  it.  I  am  planning  to  have  3-5 

interviews.  The  sampling  method  suitable  for  my  research  is  non-probability 

sampling  -  the  snowball  sampling.  Initially,  I  select  a  group  of  people  who  are 

going to be asked first. Then, I asked about people they could recommend with the 

same professional characteristics. This way I planned to reach saturation.  

The  interview  is  divided  on  the  several  blocks,  each  serving  for  the 

particular aim: 

1.  Introduction 

2.  Respondents profiling 

3.  Resource fund 

4.  Water optimization practices and efficiency evaluation 

5.  Perspective on the new practices introduction 

6.  Low-code in agriculture 

The  full  script  of  the  interview  main  questions  could  be  found  in  the 

Appendix 1. 

Starting  with  the  Introduction  part,  it  is  the  formal  brief  introduction  of 

myself to the respondent. I tell my name, field of study and present the topic of my 

thesis.  I  ask  the interviewee about their name or how I can refer to them. Also on 

this stage I aim to gather permission to use the given data in my research, assuring 

that the names will be changed and the respondent will stay anonymous.  

On  the  second  stage  I  need  to  categorize  the  respondent  and  gather  more 

professional information about them. Since I am planning to gain insights from the 

individual  farmers  or  representatives  of  the  SMEs  (Are  you  an  individual  or  a 

representative of a company?). If the respondent is associated with some company, 

I  ask  additionally  about  whether  it  is classified as an SME, clarifying the number 

of  employees  (If  a  company  representative:  Is  your  business  classified  as 

small/medium?  Why?  How  many  employees  does  the  company  have?). Besides, I 

27 

 
refine  the  area  of  responsibility  of  the  person  and  the  location  (What  is  your 

position  and  what  do  you  do?  Where?).  This  way  I  could  fully  comprehend  the 

interviewee’s profile and somehow classify them further.  

The  Resource  fund  block  is  devoted  to  the  resource  fund.  Since  I  select 

people,  who  are  aware  of  the  company’s  numbers,  I  need  to  know  the  actual 

percentage  on  operational costs and on water for irrigation in particular (Question 

about  resources:  what  is  your  cost/resource  fund  (percentage  %  of  total  costs 

purely for the operational expenses)? Which percentage of your total costs do you 

spend specifically on water irrigation?). It would be insightful to ask whether they 

find  the  value  optimal  (Is  this  value  optimal?).  Collecting  this  data,  I  could 

evaluate  it  and  compare  answers  with  each  other,  seeking for the patterns. In this 

block  I  must understand that every plant requires a specific amount of water. And 

even the big numbers could be optimal for some crops (e. g. rice). That is why I am 

asking a professional's opinion on their products as a more reliable source.  

Next  information  I  am  interested  in  is  about  optimization  practices 

adoption  by  the  respondents  and  their  companies  (Have  you  ever  applied  any 

methods  to  optimize  water  costs?).  It is related to the background and reflects the 

attitude towards the possible new approaches adoption even before asking directly 

about  it.  If  yes,  I  additionally  ask details about these practices, their effectiveness 

and  outcomes  (If  yes,  what  practices  or  technologies  have  you  used  to  optimize 

water usage and, hence, costs? If yes, are these practices or technologies effective? 

If  yes,  is there monetary or percentage data which could demonstrate the solution 

effectiveness?  If  yes,  provide  examples  of  the  results  when  implementing  the 

practices  (e.g.  cost  reduction/increased  yields)).  I  could  evaluate  the  spread  of 

special  optimization  practices  and  technological  base  of  the  SMEs  for  further 

upgraded solution propositions.  

After  I  see  the  preliminary  picture  and  what  is  done I should move to the 

questions  on  perspectives.  I  intend to ask directly about interviewees' thoughts on 

improving the water efficiency, considering the exact IT or digital solution (Would 

you  like  to  improve  water  use  efficiency?  Have you thought of using IT or digital 

28 

 
solutions for water use optimization? Are you willing to use IT or digital solutions 

for  water  use  optimization?).  This  block  is  essential  to  understand  the  attitude 

towards  the  adoption  of  new  technologies  and  assess  openness  of  the  Russian 

agricultural sector representatives. I expect to get insights on the main benefits and 

constraints why the respondents are using or eager to use the new technologies and 

what  limits  and  challenges  they  are  facing,  respectively  (If  yes  or  already  using, 

what  is  the  main  reason  why  you  are  willing  to  use  or  are  willing  to  use  IT  or 

digital  solutions  for  water  optimization?  What  could  be  or  are  the  barriers  and 

constraints that prevent you from adopting new technologies?). 

The  last  question  set  is  devoted  to  people’s  awareness  of  the  low-code 

approach and the perspectives in the agricultural industry. In order to introduce my 

idea  I  need  firstly  to  understand  whether  the  interviewees  know  what  low-code 

technology  is  (Have  you  heard  of  low-code  technology?).  If  I  get  a  negative 

answer,  I  will  briefly  outline  the  key  idea  and  demonstrate  some  examples  with 

visual  elements  (e.  g.  UX/UI  screenshots).  Besides,  I  would  ask  whether  the 

respondents  know  the  exact  implementation  of  this  innovation  in  the  sector  (Do 

you  know  some  examples  of  low-code  technology  implementation  or  adoption  in 

the agricultural sector? If yes, provide and briefly describe specific examples of its 

integration.). It is a small, but still a possibility that they even utilize some LCNC 

tools.  Nevertheless,  their  knowledge  would  contribute  to  drawing  the  overall 

situation regarding the low-code and LCDP in Russian agriculture.  

And  finally,  I would describe my thesis, that I want to develop a LCDP to 

meet  the  needs  of  the  Russian agricultural industry, used mainly for digitalization 

of  water  irrigation  systems.  To  solve  the  challenges  and  meet  the  expectations, 

transforming to the technical requirements, my last question will be about possible 

functionality of the LCDP, useful for enhancing water irrigation, and ask follow-up 

question  regarding  the  expected  price  of  the  solution  (What  functions  would  you 

like to see in the water irrigation management and monitoring system?). 

Undoubtedly,  in  the end I will thank my respondents for their contribution 

to the Russian agriculture development.   

29 

 
2.3. INTERVIEWS RESULTS 

I  was  contacting  15  industry  professionals  and  out  of  this  only  6  people 

answered  me  and  4  met  my  requirements  when  selecting  the  respondents  and 

agreed to have an interview. The semi-structured interviews were conducted via the 

online  meeting  platform  Zoom  and  took  roughly  15-25  minutes  each.  The 

interviews  were  conducted  over the span of 2 months, from March to April 2025. 

The  answers  were  recorded  and  transcripted  into  the  text  format,  so  the  data  is 

easier to proceed and analyze.  

There  are  participants  from  different  parts  of  Russia,  2  from  the  Moscow 

Oblast  (Region),  1  from  Bryansk  Oblast  (Region)  and  1  from  Volgograd  Oblast 

(Region). The map is on Figure 5.  

Figure 5. Geographical distribution of the participants. 

All  of  them  had  different  crops,  In  Moscow  Oblast  2  enterprises 

representatives specialized in apples and carrots and cabbages. In Bryansk Oblast - 

in potatoes. In Volgograd people were growing onions. For the more convenience I 

will assign the fake names of the interviewees. They would be Ivan (apples), Anna 

(carrots and cabbages), Alex (potatoes) and Mark (onions), 2 males and 2 females, 

30 

 
 
 
in  the  order  I  presented  the  crops.  Overall,  there  were  1  small  business  and  3 

medium-sized  enterprises  with  51  employees  on  average.  The  fields  were 

calculated from 35 to 500 hectares.  

As  it  was  stated,  the  interviewed  specialists  were  industry  professionals 

with  different  areas  of  responsibility.  Ivan  was  an  operational  management,  who 

was  organizing 

field  works  and  controlling 

resources.  Anna  was  an 

agronom-manager,  caring  for  the  crops  irrigation  and  fertilization  and  preparing 

documentation.  Alex  had  kind  of  the  strategic  specialists  role  and  she  was 

responsible for the agrotechnological integration within her company, contributing 

to the successful development. And Mark was a head of agronomic service, which 

also was controlling resources and collaborating with suppliers.   

For  the resource fund, on average the operational costs accounted for 69% 

of the total annual cost (Figure 6).  

Figure 6. Amount of the operational costs compared from the annual expenses. 

Most  of  the  spent  money  went  to  the  labour  costs  and  associated  taxes, 

roughly  30%  on  average.  The  second  big  part  of  expenses  are  fertilisers  and soil 

(20%).  Water  and  electricity  is  the  10%  on  average  which  is  the  third  largest 

category out of five (Figure 7). 

31 

 
 
Figure 7. Company annual expenses on average. 

2 out of 4 respondents or 50% believe the water usage is not as optimal as 

could potentially be. 100% of interviewees have already integrated some practices 

to  optimize  the  irrigation  process  to  reduce  water  usage.  The  most  popular 

practices  were  drip  irrigation  (100%),  soil  moisture sensors (75%) and night time 

irrigation  (50%).  The  adopted  optimization  reduced  the  water  consumption  by 

approximately  30%-40%.  Furthermore,  Ivan  claimed  a  yield  increase  by  15%, 

Anna  shared  that  labour  costs  were  diminished  up  to  30%.  And  Mark,  which 

company  utilized  the  sprinklers,  said  the  yields  grew  twice.  All  the  participants 

agreed  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  implemented  practices.  With  the  knowledge, 

gathered  from  literature  review,  here  I  outlined  my  first  and  second  hypothesis, 

believing  LCDP  introduced  could  decrease  resources  as  well  while  increasing 

yields: 

H1:  Adoption  of  the LCDP leads to the water usage being expected to 

be reduced by 30% and labour by 20% after 2 years of the implementation.  

H2:  Adoption  of  the  LCDP  leads  to  the  yields  being  expected  to  be 

increased by 10% after 2 years of the implementation.  

Although  half  of  the  answers  on  the  optimal  value  agreed  on  it  being 

irrational,  all  company  representatives  want  to  enhance  the  water  effectiveness  if 

possible. 100% of interviewees have thought about adopting a digital solution and 

32 

 
 
are  ready  to  introduce  it  within  the  enterprises  they  are  working  on.  So, my next 

hypothesis is being formulated:  

H3: At least 80% of SMEs want to enhance water efficiency and adopt 

a new piece of IT solution within 1 year. 

The main drivers are water bills reduction (100%), increased yields (100%) 

and,  hence,  raised  profit  (100%).  The  histogram  built  in  Figure  8 reflects results. 

As for the limitations and constraints, all people asked are worried about high costs 

and technological complexity of the implementations (Figure 9).  

Figure 8. Drivers for digital technology adoption. 

Figure 9. Limits for digital technology adoption. 

33 

 
 
 
Only  half  of  the  participants  were  acknowledged  with  the  low-code 

technology.  Interesting  to  notice,  these  people  were  from  the Moscow Oblast. As 

the known examples they said international practices. 

As  for  the  desired  functions,  top  interviewees  choices  were  irrigation 

scheduling, remote control and switching automation (Figure 10). 

Figure 10. Functions people want to see in the future LCDP for smart irrigation. 

After  I  highlighted  the  results,  gathered  during  my  interview,  I  needed  to 

properly  analyse  data  and  outline  key  insights.  To  do  so,  I  applied  a  thematic 

analysis,  a  method  to  describe  and  organize  the  qualitative  data.  Firstly  I need to 

use  coding  and  then  break  the  data  into  themes.  Coding  is  the  qualitative  data 

method  of  analysis  that  stands for developing “codes” as the descriptive elements 

to  structure  and  categorize  the  big  amount  of  data  like  the  interview  results.  It 

encodes  data  and is helping to find out patterns. I put codes in the quote marks to 

differentiate  them  in  the  next  two  paragraphs.  There  are  two  coding  techniques, 

representing  two  different  approaches  for  the  data  organization,  deductive  and 

inductive.  

The  first  one  is  about  deriving  codes  from  the  primary  analysis  of  the 

literature  review  and  before  the  actual  interviews.  I  had  already  done  some 

investigation and knew the area of research, so the predefined codes will be helpful 

to stay focused during the interviews. The codes I outlined were directly connected 

to the agriculture and technology usage in the sector. To profile the respondent the 

codes  “small  enterprise”,  “medium  enterprise”,  “company  representative”, 

“individual  farmer”  from  their  introduction  were  outlined.  Besides,  since  I  chose 

34 

 
 
primary  managers  to  talk  with,  the  “operational  manager” was introduced. As for 

the  insights  on  managing  resources,  I  wanted  to  focus  on  “water  resource”, 

“resource management”, “resource costs” when asking about their resource fund. I 

expect  to hear whether respondents consider their water costs reasonable, are they 

either “optimal/non optimal”. For the codes determining practices, I went for “cost 

optimization”, “irrigation practices”, “effective results”, to find out which had been 

already  implemented.  To  assess  the  technological  readiness  there  are  codes 

“readiness  to  implement”,  “reasons  for  adoption”,  “opportunities”,  “constraints”, 

“sanctions”, “digital literacy”.  

The  second  one  coding  implies  the  outlining  codes  after  the  interviews, 

based  on  the  participants'  answers.  In  this  approach  the  data  had  to  be  carefully 

read to find out something could be missed in the deductive coding. It is helpful to 

find  some  new  ideas  and  concepts,  staying  flexible  in  the  research.  That  is  why 

after  conducting  interviews  and revising the text with existing codes, I also found 

some  new  codes.  They  were  mostly  related  to  the  farmer’s  needs  and  pains, 

connected  to  resource  management.  Furthermore,  it  was  about  their  need  to 

digitalize  processes,  contributing  to  faster  and  more  effective  decision  making. 

Code  “tendency  to  save  resources”  emerged.  Although  some  participants  were 

satisfied  with  the  resource  management,  they  want  to  continue  increasing 

efficiency.  Not  only  water,  but  labour  resources.  For  the  saving  techniques  the 

“drip  irrigation”  and  “night  time  irrigations”  were  named  as  the  approaches  to 

optimize  the  water  usage.  Most  of  the  code,  retrieved  via  the  inductive  coding 

techniques,  were  found  in  the  interview  sections  where  I  was  interested  in  the 

current drivers and limitations in the Russian agricultural industry. Besides the cost 

reduction, respondents expected the digital solution to be “adaptive and compatible 

with  the  sensors”.  “Analytics  and  reports”  was  stated  as  the  beneficial  tool  to 

evaluate  the  practices  and  control  the  irrigation  process,  adjusting  when  needed. 

Still,  interviewees  struggle  with  the  “digital  knowledge”  acquiring  and  “lack  of 

enlightenment  in  the  technological  sphere”.  They  want  simple  solutions  on  the 

35 

 
market. Unfortunately, due to the “political constraints” and “IT-solution shortage” 

the issues of the suitable system are rising.  

In  addition  to  the  deductive  and inductive coding, I will revise answers to 

outline topics appearing across all the dialogues. So the already defined codes will 

be merged in the more meaningful, larger groups called themes. 

1.  High operational costs. 

During  the  interviews  I  found  that  people  are  eager  to save resources and 

diminish  costs  (“If  possible,  for  sure,  we  would  like  to  decrease  operational 

costs”). They are approximately 70% out of the annual expenses, labour and taxes 

is  top  1  with  30%  out  and  water  and  electricity  take the 3rd place (around 10%). 

High  labour  costs  are  associated  with  the  low  automation  and  digitalization  and 

rely on the hand labor facilitation mostly with some help of the farming equipment. 

Even  though  they  are  not  pouring  water  by  hand,  for  instance,  they  make  things 

work manually, monitoring the processes, which increases the demand for different 

specialists.  (“As  a  manager  I  must  control  other  workers'  activity…”).  And  there 

are less and less professionals in agriculture, and the shortage could be up to 50% 

(Interfax, 2025) (“There are not enough specialists on the market”).  

2.  Utilization of the water saving practices. 

All  respondents  have  already  used  some  optimization  practices,  so  that  is 

why  only  half  of  them  considered  water  resource  management  optimal.  Drip 

irrigation, soil moisture sensors and night time irrigation are commonly adopted by 

SMEs. Drip irrigation is the network of the pipes and tubes across the fields, which 

distribute water to the plants by small amounts. Instead of delivering water through 

sprinklers  the  system  drips  water,  saving  its  amount.  With  the  drip  irrigation  the 

fertigation  could  be  applied,  where  nutrients  and  supplements  are  delivered 

alongside.  Usually  used  for  the  vegetables  as  they  “do  not  require  constant 

excessive moisture”, like the respondent from Moscow Oblast who grows cabbage 

and  vegetables  said.  Soil  moisture  sensors  are  a  common  practice  to  overall 

improve  the  yields. They are not costly, easy to implement and are useful to track 

the  soil  condition.  And  night  time  irrigation  is  efficient  not  only  due  to  the  less 

36 

 
water and electricity cost from 11 pm to 7 am in Russia, but due to the diminished 

evaporation  in  the  colder  time.  The  night  time  irrigation  is  more  popular  in  the 

south  regions,  like  Volgograd  Oblast,  as  “summers  could  be  very  hot  and  dry”, 

according to the person growing onions.   

The software is claimed to be used in Moscow Oblast to grow apples. It is 

called  Hunter,  which  allows  working  with  several  controllers  and  adapting  the 

irrigation according to the plant's needs. The technology is closest to the previously 

outlined U. S. systems with predictive watering and remote monitoring.  

3.  Limitations to technological adoption. 

However,  there are challenges associated, stopping technological progress. 

The  key  findings  are  predicted  high  costs  and  lack  of  technological  base  and 

technical skills of the workers. The lack of the specialists in agriculture also means 

less  young,  digital  natives  workers  are  choosing  to  perform  in  the  industry. 

Consequently, simpler but more cost-efficient systems should be introduced for the 

current  employees  to  pick  up  the  functionality set easier and explore all available 

capabilities of the IT-solution. Although the agricultural sector is the most resistant 

to  the  sanctions,  right  now  import  issues  are  not  fully resolved yet. Nevertheless, 

the  national  development  is  trying  to  keep  up  pace,  but  still  the  more  advanced 

hardware and software are needed to evolve successfully. A representative from the 

Bryansk  Oblast  said  “there  are  not  many  IT-companies,  specializing  in  the 

development specifically for the agriculture needs”.  

4.  Interest in flexible digital solutions. 

Farmers  want  to  see  more  flexible  solutions.  Each  company  has  their 

specific  needs,  and  as  it  was  previously  mentioned,  there  is  not  so  much  digital 

supply  on  the  market.  The  respondents  are  ready  to  adopt  digital  technologies  if 

affordable,  and  will  potentially  increase  profit  and  yields,  decreasing  associated 

costs,  respectively.  They  also  are  interested  in  the  rapid  technologies,  delivered 

faster  to  the  company.  The  traditional time to market or TTM is proclaimed to be 

up to 3 years. However, recently it has been gradually decreasing, and now it takes 

around  12-24  months  if  the  software  comprehends  all  the  key  profound  features 

37 

 
SMEs  need.  Still,  “during  that  period  things  could  change,  especially  if  the 

business  is  new,  so  the  changes  are  being  made  in  the  technical  task  if  possible, 

slowing  down  the  software  development”  Moscow  farmer claimed. That is why I 

believe  they  would  be  interested  in  the  low-code  solution  where  they  could  fix 

system  elements  by  themselves,  without attracting outsource IT-specialists, which 

is  the  “additional  cost”.  And  the  other  two  hypotheses  were  considered  based  on 

the fourth topic analysis.  

H4: The TTM of the solution developed on the LCDP will be decreased 

by 50% (from maximum of 24 months to 12 months). 

H5:  At  least  half  of  SMEs  prefer  developing  information  systems 

internally  without  3rd  party  attraction  and  expecting  to  become  technically 

independent in the next 5 years.  

5.  Low low-code acknowledgment but moderate interest. 

Companies  closer  to  the  Moscow  capital,  the  most  progressive  city,  are 

more  aware  of  the  available  trending  solutions  like  LCDP.  They  know  about  its 

implementation mostly in the budgeting and finance sector abroad in the developed 

countries.  After  I explained to each participant the LCNC concept and my idea of 

the LCDP for agriculture, outlining its benefits and perspectives, they seemed to be 

interested  in  it.  For  the  desired  functions  the  interviewees  outlined  scheduling, 

remote control and automatic activation. It is a basic set of possible instruments in 

the  system,  not  requiring  profound innovation like AI, which are in demand. And 

they could be easily modified if needed.  

Besides,  I  asked  people  about  how  much  they  are  ready  to  pay  for  the 

solution  and  what  the  price  should  be  to  attract  users.  I  assume  the  subscription 

business  model  as  the  initial  system  will  be  rather  simple  but  is  going  to  be 

developed and, hence, the price may lift. I explained that this business model could 

be beneficial and kindly lead to the question as the follow-up one. As I understood, 

people  from  the  Moscow  oblast  named  prices  up  to  $500  per  month.  However, 

respondents  from  less  advanced  regions  suggested  the  subscription  should  start 

with $300-350 and it may gradually increase.  

38 

 
Summing  up,  based  on  the  literature  review  and  after  on  the  interview 

results, the next hypothesis are outlined: 

H1:  Adoption  of  the  LCDP  leads  to  the  water  usage being expected to be 

reduced by 30% and labour by 20% after 2 years of the implementation.  

H2:  Adoption  of  the  LCDP  leads  to  the  yields  being  expected  to  be 

increased by 10% after 2 years of the implementation.  

H3:  At  least  80%  of  SMEs  want  to  enhance  water  efficiency  and  adopt a 

new piece of IT solution within 1 year. 

H4: The TTM of the solution developed on the LCDP will be decreased by 

50% (from maximum of 24 months to 12 months). 

H5: At least half of SMEs prefer developing information systems internally 

without  3rd  party  attraction  and  expecting  to  become  technically  independent  in 

the next 5 years.  

2.4. DESIGN OF THE SURVEY AMONG SMES AND FARMERS 

Besides the interview I will utilize the quantitative research method, survey. 

It  will  be  conducted  among  the  users,  farmers  who  could  potentially  apply  the 

LCDP in their everyday professional activity. This method would also be helpful to 

formulate  my  hypothesis,  assessing  the  needs  and  peculiarities  of  the  target 

audience.  

The survey consists of 5 sections, excluding the introduction and reference 

part  where  I  describe  the  low-code.  In  the  first  one,  it  is  required  to  answer 

questions  related  to  the  area  of    employment.  The  second  one  contains  questions 

about  the  use  of technologies to optimize processes. The third and fourth sections 

are devoted to the usefulness and ease of use of the development.  

I  designed  the  survey  in  accordance  with  the  Technology  Acceptance 

Model,  referred  to  as  TAM. Developed by Davis in 1989 it suggests a framework 

that models the process of users to actually accept and use the information system. 

I  focus  on  the  Perceived  Usefulness  (U)  and  Perceived  Ease  of  Use  (E)  as  the 

39 

 
 
 
variables  that  shape  users  behaviour  within  the  technology,  forming  the  actual 

intention to utilize it. The former is about the benefit the system is going to bring. 

And  the latter can explain to what extent people are comfortable using it and how 

much effort it requires to get used to the technology.  

As in the interviews firstly I present myself, my field of study, research and 

its  aim.  In  this  survey  I  do  not  ask  for  any  sensitive  personal  data  but  still  I 

guarantee the anonymity of the respondents.  

The  first  section  is  called  General  sample  characteristics  and  stakeholder 

profile.  In  this  part  I  ask  regular  questions  to  get  to  know  the  participants  better. 

The  question  regarding  age,  employee type, number of workers and type of crops 

are presented (Your age? Are you an individual or a company representative? How 

many employees are there in the company? What crops do you grow?). I added an 

age  question  to  possibly  evaluate  the  technological  advancement  of  the  farmers, 

understanding the reverse relationship, i. e. the older the sample, the less they tend 

to  integrate  innovations.  Recent  studies  prove  that  younger  farmers,  especially 

under  30  with  higher  levels  of  education  use  technologies  more  (Bang  J.  et  al., 

2025).  Also  people  under  35  are  more  confident  in  the  technologies  (88%), 

meanwhile  the  value  for  the  35-44s  age  gap is 74%, 45-54 old farmers have only 

50% confidence, and for over 55 it is just 33% (Cleary, E., 2019). Another research 

suggests  that  older  people  are risk-averse and less tolerable to innovation by 48% 

points (Miine, L.K. et al., 2023). The size also matters, and the larger the farm, the 

more advanced processes are there (Bang J. et al., 2025).   

Also  for  the  crops  question  I  want  to  find  out  which  types  of  crops  are 

being  cultivated  in  a  more  modernized  way.  It  is  usually  food  with  a  bigger 

economic value and significant global demand. Thus, these crops will attract more 

investment  in  the  production  area.  The  “high-value  crops”  are  usually  fruits  and 

vegetables but in Russia there are grain and industrial crops to be more important, 

since 2024/2025 Russia produced wheat (81.6 million), barley (16.25 million) and 

sunflower  seed  (16.9  million)  the most (Figure 11). Wheat has always been a key 

national  crop.  Over  the  past  10  years  Russia  has  become  one  of  the  biggest 

40 

 
exporters  and  an  absolute  leader  in  production.  In  the  last  agricultural  year  (July 

2023 - June 2024) 26% of the global wheat was of Russian origins (RBC, 2024). 

Figure 11. Top produced commodities in Russia. Source: FAS USDA. 

Section  2  is  the  Using  technology  for  processes  optimization.  I  want  my 

participants  to  answer  the  question  whether  they  are  utilizing  irrigation  at  all,  to 

assess  the  actual  demand  in  the  water  management  digitalization  (Are  you  using 

irrigation  for  crops  watering?).  I  suppose  a  small  number  of  SMEs  will  use 

irrigation  and  mostly  in  the  Southern  region  with  drier  climate  where  its  usage 

could potentially cover the high adoption and maintenance costs.  

Also I want to know if the respondents are already using or eager to use at 

least 

1 

piece 

of 

technology 

(Do 

you/the 

company 

use 

any 

devices/technologies/practices to optimize processes? Would you like to implement 

a  more  technologically advanced solution to increase efficiency at a lower cost?). 

As it was outlined in Chapter 1, the global index accounted for 52% (McKinsey & 

Company,  2024).  But  breaking  down  the  index  in  Russia,  depending  on  the 

company  size,  it  turns  out  that  90%  of  large-scale  enterprises  are  adopting 

technologies,  meanwhile  the  percentage  for  the  SMEs  is  smaller,  25-30%  (RBC, 

2024).  There  is  a  direct  relationship  between  the  technologies  and  profitability. 

This  way,  the  more  technologies  are  being  integrated,  the  more  money  the 

company  earns,  and  consequently,  the  more  they  could  spend  to  afford  the 

high-cost latest innovation.  

In the Reference Section, like before a few last questions in my interview, I 

talk about the low-code technology and its perspectives of the adoption specifically 

41 

 
 
for  irrigation  management  system  development.  I  explain  its  basics,  potential 

features  and  outline  the  example  with  the  visual  representation  of  it.  Since  I 

assume  the  acknowledgement  about  the  technology  is  going  to  be  low  I  find  it 

reasonable  to  briefly  explain  to  the  respondents  the  most  essential  aspects  of  my 

LCDP alongside with its key functionality for them to fully understand and realize 

the  possible  benefits  and  drawbacks  for  further  implementation  within  their 

companies.  

The next two sections are designed in accordance with the TAM theoretical 

framework. Section 3 called Technology usefulness reflects the TAM’s framework 

element  Perceived  Usefulness  (U)  as  I  need  to  understand  what  is  the  system's 

actual contribution to the overall enterprise performance. I am going to offer some 

statements  related  to  the  usefulness  of  the  future  platform  for  irrigation 

digitalization. I ask people to rate how much you agree with the statements, where 

1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree.  

I  expect  people  to  mostly  agree  on  the  following  statements:  use  of 

technology will reduce water costs, use of technology will reduce labour costs and 

use  of  technology  will  increase  field  yields  (Use  of  technology  will  reduce water 

costs.  Use  of technology will reduce labour costs. Use of technology will increase 

field yields). In the 2.1. Overview of the low-code solutions in agriculture where I 

outlined  existing  solutions  I  found  different  results  on  the  water  reduction  when 

implementing  different  technologies.  The  expected  decrease  in  water  bills 

accounted for 35% (Smart Rain). As for water usage, the amount itself is saved by 

15%-40%  on  average,  according  to  the  available  literature.  (Water  Bit,  Smart 

Irrigation).  The  smart  system  which  includes  consolidating  the  data  from  all  IoT 

sensors,  crop  data  and  weather  data could contribute to approximately 50% water 

savings combined with increased yields up to 35% (Zia H. et al., 2021). The table 

is  presented  in  Figure  12  as  the  average  numbers  of  saving  water  and  improving 

yields  after  different  irrigation  techniques  introduced.  So  the  smart  technologies 

suggest  the  percentage  up  to  55%  for  the  former  and  up  to  25%  for  the  latter 

(Askaraliev B. et al., 2024).  

42 

 
Figure 12. Outcomes of different irrigation techniques on water consumption and yields. Source: 

Askaraliev B. et al.    

As for the labour costs, it is estimated at 82-88% during the flush-irrigation 

events  and  57%  during  the  ponding  periods,  compared  to  the  manual  irrigation 

(Champness M. et al., 2023). 

Besides  the  key  resource-based  indicators  I  also  ask  about  the  time  to 

market  or  TTM. In the context of the technologies designing and deployment it is 

described  as  the  amount  of  time  from  the idea discovery to actual system launch, 

so it is the development time. There is not much data on the specific duration of the 

smart irrigation system development in the open sources available. However, there 

was  a  study  claiming 

that  optimization  of  irrigation  through  innovative 

technologies  is being done over the three seasons, from 2021 to 2023, forming 36 

months  (Di  Gennaro  S.  F.  et  al.,  2024).  Thus,  it  is  estimated  to  take  about 12-36 

months  to  develop.  Low-code  could boost the development time, decreasing it up 

to  90%  (McKinsey  &  Company,  2022).  In  the  context  of  the  farm  digitalization 

using  the  LCNC  tools  the  TTM  could  be  diminished  by  40-60%  on  average 

(Bootstrapped, 2024). I believe the farmers would agree on the low-code approach 

to  decrease  the  digital  solution TTM after I explain the details and features of the 

LCDP as an efficient instrument (Use of technology will decrease production time 

to market (TTM)).  

Last Section 4, Technology ease of use, is built to assess the Perceived Ease 

of  Use  (E) as the perception of the technology and how the users attitude towards 

its utilization. A few statements, related to the ease of use of the future platform for 

irrigation  digitalization,  will  also  be  offered.  And  I  ask  people  to  rate  how  much 

you agree with the statements, where 1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree. Recently 

43 

 
 
many farmers demonstrate a strong preference towards internalizing the processes, 

maintaining control over the data and the system.  

Traditionally,  agriculture  was digitalized by the public sector, primarily by 

university  research.  However,  over  the  past  decades  the  private  sector  actively 

participated  in  R&D,  expanding  their  influence  and increasing their power on the 

technology market (McFadden J. et al., 2022).  

SMEs are reluctant to the new smart farming technologies due to the costs, 

access  and  support.  Additionally,  barriers  to  adoption  are  related  to  the 

cybersecurity  and  privacy  risks  and  farm  data  ownership  challenges present. And 

there are still no specific legal frameworks targeting data in the respective industry, 

so  the  data  protection  regulation  in  agriculture  is  controlled  by  the  general  data 

laws. Hence, surveys conducted demonstrate that half of the farmers (49%) are not 

very comfortable with service or technology having direct access to their data. And 

mostly (56%) do not trust that service or technology maintain the privacy or do not 

provide the data acquired to the third parties having the direct access (Wiseman L. 

et  al.,  2019).  Farmers  are  still  afraid  of data privacy since they do not understand 

how  the  private  companies  are  operating  their  data  and whether it is sold to third 

parties (McFadden J. et al., 2022).  

It  is  better  that  both  parties  trust  each  other,  so  there  is  a  need  for 

governmental  intervention.  They  could directly or indirectly encourage farmers to 

experiment  with  technologies  and  settle  standardized  approaches  with  minimal 

financial  investments  from  the  farmers  side  (McFadden  J.  et  al.,  2022).  For 

instance,  in  Russia  some  governmental  programs  were  initiated  to  digitalize  the 

industry  in  the  past  two-three  years.  In  2022  the  Single  Digital  Platform  for 

Agro-Industrial Complex was announced as the attempt to unify the public services 

for  the  industry. In the Ministry the platform is considered to increase the product 

quality  and  safety,  creating  the  digital  ecosystem  of  the  different  management 

layers (TAdviser, 2022).  

So, based on the data available, I could definitely see some priority over the 

outsource technologies in favor of the development inside the enterprises (It would 

44 

 
be  better  to  develop  the  information  system  internally  without  attracting  third 

parties).   

In  Chapter  1  the  literature  review  showed  that  key  framer’s  struggles 

include  complexity  and  specific  knowledge  required,  that  is  why  LCNC 

designation  was  suggested  as  the  easy  solution  to  adapt  to.  Still,  there  is  little 

acknowledgement  of  the  low-code  technology  among  Russian  businesses, 

especially  SMEs.  Digital 

technologies  based  on  the  platforms  are  often 

misunderstood  by  non-technical  specialists,  who  the  farmers  usually  are.  The 

crucial  difference  between  the  hardware,  often  used  in  the  fields  within  the 

agricultural  equipment,  and  software  is  decreased  and  merged,  updating  the 

approach  towards  building  traditional  smart  solutions.  These  solutions  are 

developed based on computer programming and engineering expertise (McFadden 

J. et al., 2022).  

 I could see little controversy regarding perception of the LCDP as the most 

efficient  and  convenient  tool  for  inner  development  due to the lack of awareness. 

Even  though  I explained the concept, some specialists, especially older ones, may 

doubt the technology and be skeptical towards it (It would be easy for me to learn 

how to use a LCDP to create and adjust my own digital solutions). 

Finally, the last statement is about access to the required technological base 

to  design  and  use  the  suggested  system  developed  on  the  LCDP  (I  have  all  the 

devices  needed  to use the technology: mobile phone, laptop and/or computer). As 

it  was  already  mentioned  in  Chapter  1,  agriculture  is  considered  to  be  one of the 

least  digitally  advanced  industries.  The  Higher  School  of  Economics Institute for 

Statistical  Studies  and  Economics  of  Knowledge  stated  the  digitalization  index 

being  23.  Only  74.3%  of  organizations  have  broadband  internet,  which  is 

relevantly lower in comparison with other industries, However the access to cloud 

services  is  calculated  as  20.9%,  compared  to  the  top-3  Energy  sector  with 

digitalization index 30 (Figure 13). Since farming is originally located in the rural 

area,  the  low  technological  rate  is  expected  and  justified.  Hence,  the  closer 

45 

 
businesses  are  located  to  the  big  cities  in  Russia,  to  the  areal  centers,  the  more 

digital the enterprise is.  

Figure 13. Digitalization index and digital intensity across different industries in Russia in 2019. 

Source: HSE ISSEK. 

The  final  section  is  the  financial  one,  where  I  ask  how  much  people  are 

ready to pay for the solution, putting the prices according to the number suggested 

during the interview by the specialist.  

LCDP  does  not  require  powerful hardware or a complicated technological 

base  of  the  enterprise,  so  the  laptop  or computer is enough to develop the system 

and people could manage them even with the help of mobile phones.  

Full transcript of the survey could be found in Appendix 2.  

2.5. SURVEY RESULTS  

When  the  quantitative  research  was  conducted,  I  could  present my results 

as  well.  The  survey  was  held  for  approximately  3  months,  when  form  was 

launched  in  March  2025  and  closed  in  May  2025.  The  survey  was  originally  in 

46 

 
 
 
 
Russian  language,  but  I  use  the  machine  translation  of  the  page  to  format  the 

questions and answers in English, that is why the translation of the website may be 

a little different from my personal interpretation of the question. Still, the meaning 

remains the same regarding the translation.  

I approached the interview participants, the same as was chosen during the 

qualitative study, and kindly asked them to complete the survey and send it to their 

colleagues,  friends  in  the  industry  and  business  partners  if  possible.  Also  other 

people  in  agriculture  who  did  not  agree  to  have  an  interview  completed a survey 

and helped me to collect as many answers as possible by sending it to the qualified 

population. Overall, I gathered 107 respondents.  

Out  of  them  the  majority  was  aged  35-44  years  (36.4%),  also  the  bigger 

proportion  were  people  from  25  to  34  (27.1%) and from 45 to 64 (22.4%). There 

were not many young specialists in the industry, aged less than 24 years, only 8.4% 

(Figure  14).  I  could  assess  that  the  results  comprise  quite  a diverse population in 

terms of the study limitation.  

Figure 14. Survey results. Age. 

Also  most  of  the  representatives,  91.6%,  were in the SMEs rather than an 

individual entrepreneurship or independent farmer (Figure 15).  

47 

 
 
Figure 15. Survey results. Occupation. 

Moreover,  the  size  of  the companies they work in mostly consist of 16-50 

employees, proved by 43% of votes. However, some employees were in the larger 

entities  with  51-100 employees on average (38.3%). Not many very small or very 

big companies were identified, only 7 respondents or 6.5% (Figure 16). 

Figure 16. Survey results. Company size. 

The  occupation  sphere  was  added  to  see the attitude of the farmers across 

the  different  areas  in  agriculture.  Since I consider only plants, the livestock block 

was  not  included  at  all.  I  can  conclude  that  the  distribution  of  the  occupation  is 

rather  even  as  well  with  dominating  three  crop  types:  vegetables  (34.6%),  fruits 

(23.4%)  and  technical  crops  (22.4%).  Workers  growing  grains  and  feeding  crops 

were in the minority (Figure 17).  

48 

 
 
 
Figure 17. Survey results. Occupation or crops grown. 

After  recognizing  the  characteristics  of  the  respondents,  I  could  ask  the 

questions  regarding  the  irrigation  and  technologies  used.  I  found  out  that  only 

56.1%  use  the  actual  irrigation  (Figure  18).  It  means  that  not  all  people  will 

possibly  require  scheduling  and  automating.  These  results  were  insightful  to 

review  my  future  LCDP.  In  this  case  I  thought about the versatility of the system 

which  may  suit  almost  every  company  since  I  aim  to develop a flexible solution. 

Despite some companies not utilizing irrigation, there are still IoT sensors to track 

the  soil state and geological values (e. g. temperature, humidity), weather forecast 

API and statistical prognosing and suggestions are possible to remind watering and 

manage its use.  

Figure 18. Survey results. Irrigation utilization. 

Nevertheless,  it  seems  most  or  89.7%  of  the  SMEs  are  using  some 

technologies or at least practices to optimize the watering (Figure 19).  

49 

 
 
 
Figure 19. Survey results. Practices for water optimization. 

And  98.1%  of  respondents  want  to  improve  the  efficiency  at a lower cost 

via the implementation of a more technological solution (Figure 20). 

Figure 20. Survey results. Willingness to adopt digital solutions. 

I skipped the Reference section, a part where I describe the technology and 

what the respondents should expect from the proposed technology as there were no 

questions. 

Moving  to  the  TAM’s  framework  section,  I  firstly  needed  to  use  the 

Perceived  Usefulness  (U).  I  utilized  the  Likert  scale,  where  I  offered participants 

some  statements  and  they  should  express  how  much  they agree or could relate to 

the claim, using the scale from 1 to 5, where the bigger the number, the higher the 

agreeableness. I considered 3, the number in between, as either an “I don’t know” 

or “50/50” result.  

Based  on  the  answers,  57%  agree  and  33.6%  absolutely  agree  that  the 

platform  could  potentially  reduce  water  costs  as  its  main  aim  stated  (Figure  21). 

Since I propose the automation, analytics and prediction, I supposed that the direct 

resource  used  is  going  to be diminished due to the more accurate distribution and 

optimization.   

50 

 
 
 
Figure 21. Survey results. Section 3. Claim 1. 

I  was  also  surprised  by  the  big  proportion  who  voted  on  the  labour  cost 

reduction,  45.8%  agreed  and  34.6%  absolutely  agreed  (Figure  22).  I  expect  a 

decrease in this cost as well but it was like an indirect effect. Since less specialists 

would be included in the irrigation process due to the automation, the expenses are 

about to be cut. It is a good point due to the farmer’s shortage on the market as the 

continuous  trend,  especially  in  the  more  urbanized  parts  of  Russia  (Yakov  & 

Partners,  2024).  Moreover,  since  the  final  system  will  be  designed  inside  the 

company,  the  expenses  on  the  third  party  developers  would  decrease  this  way. 

Instead,  the  farmers  should  hire  a  few  inner  technical  specialists,  who  could 

manage  the  solution  and  facilitate  hardware  integration.  And  in  the  long  run  the 

developers'  necessity  could  be  absent  at  all if farmers learn how to work with the 

LCDP instruments by themselves.  

Figure 22. Survey results. Section 3. Claim 2. 

People  believe  that  the  LCDP  will  increase  yields  (Figure  23).  In  the 

question  there  is  a  bigger  proportion  on  the  “in  between”  side,  but  still  71.1% 

51 

 
 
 
either  agree  or  strongly  agree.  Also  a  part  of  the  effect  of  more  efficient  water 

utilization.  With  the  wise  resource  distribution  farmers  would  produce  a  bigger 

amount of plants and, hence, increase profit from selling good quality products.   

Figure 23. Survey results. Section 3. Claim 3. 

I  suppose  the  least  clear  rate for the farmers is time to market or TTM. In 

the  Reference  section  I  explained  its  meaning  and  hope  that  respondents  got  the 

definition.  In  this  case  the  results  are  more  diverse  but  still  with  the  preference 

towards  4  (agree)  (Figure  24).  68.2%  thought  the  LCDP  could  reduce  the  TTM 

since  it  is  easier  to  receive  and  process  feedback  inside  one  company  with  a 

smaller development life cycle. The external LCDP may be as efficient as the inner 

future  system,  but  the  compliance  rules  are  a  crucial  factor  which  boost  the 

development.  There  will  be  less  issues  on  the  data  regulatory  and  politics  of  the 

company and, therefore, more trust and easier negotiation. Still, 22.4% are not sure 

about it but it is less than one fourth.  

Figure 24. Survey results. Section 3. Claim 4. 

52 

 
 
 
Continuing  the  benefits  of  the  inner  development,  I  asked  about  the 

preference towards it, without contacting third parties, opening the section devoted 

to the TAM’s framework element Perceived Ease of Use (E) (Figure 25). As it was 

predicted, most of the respondents are more tolerant towards internal development 

(47.7%  agree  and  30.8%  strongly  agree), only 23 people out of 107 do not agree. 

In  Russia  the  data  protection  issues  are  observed  as  well,  following  in  alignment 

with  global  preferences.  People  are  concerned  about  privacy,  especially  when  it 

comes  to  the  sensitive  data,  considered  as  the  competitive  advantage  in  the 

respective market, customization and challenges if the outsource is attracted.  

Figure 25. Survey results. Section 4. Claim 1. 

Next  claims have brought the most disputes among the survey participants 

(Figure 26). Despite 38.3% agreeing and 16.8% strongly agreeing on the platform's 

simplicity  and  easy  learning,  25.2%  are  not  sure  and  15.9%  seem  to  disagree.  I 

assume  farmers  are  less  acknowledged  of  the  technology,  especially  in  Russia, 

where LCNC designation is not so profound. 

53 

 
 
Figure 26. Survey results. Section 4. Claim 2. 

On  the  contrary to the last but one claim, the final statement seemed to be 

the  most  agreed  on.  104  (97.2%)  respondents  stated  they  have  enough 

technological base to adopt the LCDP (Figure 27). If they successfully finished this 

survey  I  assume  they  had  a  minimum  phone,  computer  and  internet  connection. 

Consequently,  as  I  stated  in  the  survey  design,  managing  and  using  the  smart 

irrigation system with LCNC base does not require advanced hardware.  

Figure 27. Survey results. Section 4. Claim 3. 

Last  but  not  least, as for the financial estimations, most of the participants 

are ready to pay a bigger price, which is more than I expected (Figure 28). Most of 

the  respondents (40.2%) agree on the 35,00-45,000 rubles which is approximately 

$$438-563.  Although  there  were  people  who  chose  the  minimum  price  (28%),  I 

still  do  believe  that  I  explained  in  the  Reference  section  all  the  LCDP  benefits. 

54 

 
 
 
Also  I  am  going  to  calculate  the  resource  saved  in  Chapter  3,  to  prove  that  it  is 

cost-efficient compared to traditional watering.  

Figure 28. Survey results. Price estimation.

55 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 3. LCDP PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT AND COST 

EVALUATION 

3.3. PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT 

After  interview  and  survey analysis I decided to design some architectural 

elements  of  the  future  LCDP  with  key  system  capabilities  for  effective  water 

management.  

The  Unified  Model  Language  Notation  or the UML was implied to create 

sophisticated  schemes  (Figure  29).  The  use  case  diagram  itself  represents  a 

graphical  overview  of  all  use  cases  done  primarily  by the user of the information 

system.  There  are  some  scenarios  that  could  occur  via  using  an  information 

system. In the use case diagrams key scenarios are named with 3 parties involved, 

farmers,  admin  and  the  developer.  I  decided  to  include  the  last  mentioned role at 

first  for  companies  to  set  the  correct  integrations  with  APIs,  IoT  sensors  and 

weather  forecast.  In  the  long  run  with  the  proper  employee  studying  it  could  be 

optional.  The  idea  is  that  the  admin  could  add  users,  mostly  farmers.  They  have 

most  of  the  use  cases,  as  they  adjust  the  system,  interact  with  it,  set  up  the 

automation and get notifications.   

Figure 29. Use case diagram of the LCDP for smart irrigation (created via Visual Paradigm). 

56 

 
 
 
 
Next  scheme  is  the  activity  diagram,  breaking  down  the  activities  in  the 

system  (Figure  30).  Activity  diagram  is  another  approach  of  Scenario-based 

analysis. It is a more detailed description of use cases, outlined before. The activity 

diagram  is  also  a  good  representation  of  the  user’s  behavior  in  the  developed 

information system.  

All  possible  outcomes  of  the  user’s  actions  are  highlighted,  that  is  why 

such  a  model  is  a  great  contribution  to  the  understanding  of  how  parts  of  the 

system  are  working  together.  The  logic  is  that  the  user  is  authorising,  entering 

profile  details. If it is the first time or they would change the system it is required 

to  enter  farm  details  and  create  or  rearrange  the  elements,  specifically  for  the 

farmers current needs. Then, the system is being set up with help of the developer, 

who  integrates  external  services.  After  the  preparation  the  user  could  review  the 

suggested schedule, based on the weather and soil condition, enable irrigation and 

get a report about the efficiency of the irrigation.  

Figure 30. Activity diagram of the LCDP for smart irrigation (created via Visual Paradigm). 

Structural  modeling  shows  the  structure  of  the  information  service  and 

parts  from  which  it  is  built.  Besides  the  use  case  diagram,  it is convenient to use 

57 

 
 
another diagram based on the UML notation, which is called class diagram, as it is 

valuable to introduce more details about the model.  

I  outlined  key  classes of the LCDP (Figure 31). There are 9 of them, each 

with  at  least  one  unique  attribute  or  primary  key,  usually  an  id  (PK)  and  is 

connected  with  at  least  one  another  class  via  the  foreign  key  (FK).  Also 

relationships  between  classes  are  distinguished  types.  For  instance,  there  is  a 

composition  between  Farm  and  Irrigation_sch,  meaning the dependency since the 

former  cannot  be  created  without  the  latter  and  the  first  delete  causes  destroying 

the  second.  And  it  is  a  0..*  to  1  relationships  as  the  Farm  has  none  or  several 

Irrigation_sch  but  the  schedule  is  assigned  to  the  particular  farm.  And  there  is 

aggregation  between  Sensors  and  Soil_state  and  Soil_state  and  Weather,  so  the 

Sensors  and  Weather  are  independent  classes  which  define  the  Soil_state  and the 

Soil_state could include several sensors or undermine weather conditions.  

Figure 31. Class diagram of the LCDP for smart irrigation (created via Visual Paradigm). 

Finally,  there  is  a  Business  Process  Model  and  Notation  or  the  BPMN 

diagram, reflecting the processes within actors. It is a standardized visual language, 

demonstrating modeling and communication between business processes, dividing 

on the business and technical elements.  

Like  the  Figure  32  states,  I  differentiated  Farmers  and  Developers  as two 

different  roles  but  who  both  interact  with  the  technical  element,  LCDP  as  the 

information system. To compare with the activity diagram, not only different roles 

and their interactions with the system are implied, but some components are more 

58 

 
 
visually distinguished. For instance, the databases, which are integrated on the step 

of data gathering and analysis are visually represented with the respective icon.  

Figure 32. BPMN diagram of the LCDP for smart irrigation (created via BPMN.IO). 

For the prototype, I would like to firstly present the block prototype of the 

user  interface  (UI)  of  my  solution.  On  the  left  side  there  is  a  menu  with  the 

hyperlinks to the respective sections. The page presented is about the certain farm 

and  the  information  about  it,  including  name,  irrigation  status  and  person 

responsible  for it. The most significant numbers are about to be outlined. The soil 

moisture  and  weather  data  should  be  graphically  presented with the possibility to 

display  more  details  when  clicking  on  it.  At  the  bottom  of  the  page  the schedule 

and statistics may be in the calendar form for more convenience (Figure 33).  

Figure 33. Block prototype draft of the LCDP UI (created via Figma). 

59 

 
 
 
After  some  revision  I  updated  my  prototype  and  created  several  UIs, 

crucial for understanding how the system will work. To build the interface I use the 

new  generation  service  Visily  with  upgraded  tools  for  designing  simple, 

user-friendly  but  sophisticated  mock-ups.  I  decided  to  use  blueish  colours  and 

shades,  like  baby  or  navy  blue,  for  the  association  with  water,  stability  and 

calmness. The colours are soft and pastel, with more bright elements to accent the 

user’s attention, like icons. But mostly I expect people to perceive the system as a 

reliable tool for enhancing the processes. Also the round elements prevail in the UI 

to demonstrate the credibility of the service with a modernized style, as most of the 

such systems are poorly designed and sometimes difficult to get used to, especially 

for the younger or elderly specialists. I came up with the name LowWater as a part 

of alliteration with double double w letter, referencing the purpose of the low-code 

platform for water management.  

To  begin  with  the  UIs,  I  started  with  the  basic  models  of  signing  up  and 

registration,  where  users  are  initially  entering  the  LCDP  or  logging  again.  The 

principle  is  similar  to  most  of  the  web  and  mobile  applications  with the standard 

registration procedure (Figure 34).  

60 

 
 
Figure 34. LCDP UI Prototype. Authorization process (created via Visily). 

The  next  stage  is  adding  the  farm.  If  a  user  is  new,  they  will  have  not 

registered,  so  the  system  will  firstly  suggest  doing  so.  By  clicking  the  “+ADD 

FARM”  button  it  is  possible  to  enter  the  details  of  the  land  with  its  geoposition, 

including address with a country, city and zipcode. The location might be adjusted 

manually  on  the  map  via  the respective icon. When the farmers are created, users 

could click on it to continue (Figure 35). 

61 

 
 
 
Figure 35. LCDP UI Prototype. Adding a farm (created via Visily). 

The  LCDP  has  already  in-built  functions  which  let  farmers  to  achieve 

automatization  through  the  instruments  and  mechanisms  I  will  describe  further. 

However, if a farmer wants to modernize the solution and customize it, to make it 

more  suitable  for  their  enterprise,  the developing section is devoted to the system 

additions.  The  system  could  be added only to the previously outlined farm. There 

are  three  available  instrument  sets.  The  first  is  integration,  where  the  sensors, 

weather  API  and  other  hardware  is  connected  to  the  system.  The  connection  is 

done wirelessly by the integrator, a development specialist.  

62 

 
 
 
When  the  integrations  are  made,  it  is  possible  to  tune  the  elements of the 

final  interfaces  on  the  Models  section.  There  the  model  is  created  with  separate 

elements of the solution like tables, widgets as titles, graphs, buttons, filters. All of 

them  might  be  manually  set  according  to  the personal needs. The elements might 

be created there with the simple building tool set. Like demonstrated on the UI, the 

dashboard  Sensors  data  is  a  table  with  various  columns  and  rows,  where  some 

values  are  placed.  For  example,  in  the  table  rows  might be included or not in the 

final  system.  If  necessary,  the  section  coding  is  presented  to  additionally  fix  the 

table in a specific way. I assume the user could change the colour or word print by 

the  clickable  elements.  However,  via  the  coding  it  is  possible  to  change  these 

visual elements as well.  

Finally,  the  developing  interface  might  be  performed  in  the  respective 

section,  where  the  user  could  add  or  delete  the  prebuilt  in  the  model  section 

elements  (tables, graphs, buttons). The tools are helpful to shape the interface and 

how it would look for the final users (Figure 36).  

63 

 
 
64 

 
 
 
Figure 36. LCDP UI Prototype. System adjusting (created via Visily). 

When  the  farm  is  created,  the  user  may see the home page as the primary 

UI.  There  are  notifications  on  the  top  of  the  screen  with  the  farm  and  data 

regarding  it.  There  are  some  statistics,  presented  in  the  short  form,  like  active 

schedule, irrigation status and water used. To see more details the user should look 

for  the  specific  field  or  the  schedule  via  clicking  on the respective elements. The 

fields  are  shown  as  the  separate  block  with  name  and  the  specific  product  being 

grown on (Figure 37).  

Figure 37. LCDP UI Prototype. Farm data (created via Visily). 

65 

 
 
 
On  the  previous  page  the  fields  could  be  clicked,  and  the  action  will 

redirect users to the Field UI. The Field interface is more insightful. Now only the 

schedules  of  this  field  are  being  shown  on  the  bottom  of  the page. And there are 

four  main  elements,  IoT  sensors,  weather  API,  and  hardwares,  actuators  and 

controllers.  The  sensor  data  block  is  the  largest  there  as  most  of  the  valuable 

information  is  delivered  through  the  IoT  sensors  inside  the  soil.  The  data  on  the 

screen  is  basically  soil  state,  moisture,  temperature,  air  humidity and temperature 

as well, evaporation level and suggested need in irrigation, based on the rates. And 

the latest update is presented to ensure the relevance of the values. 

On the left there is a small dashboard with the weather and precipitation of 

a  few  past  days,  today  and  a  few next days. The user could track the temperature 

and  suppose the future scheduling with some actions to undertake, prognosing the 

processes,  while  the system will take this data to execute its own calculations and 

make justified suggestions.  

Lastly, the hardware which is previously integrated and linked to the farm’s 

specific field, demonstrates the data about their work and condition, so in the case 

if  something  goes  wrong,  the  user  would  know  to  which  hardware  the  possible 

malfunction might be related to (Figure 38).  

Figure 38. LCDP UI Prototype. Fields data (created via Visily). 

66 

 
 
The profile section is kinda standardized. The section could be accessed via 

clicking on the avatar in the top right corner or the PROFILE on the left menu. The 

user  could  edit  their  photo,  name,  email,  phone  number,  position  and  add  some 

additional  information  if  necessary.  The  changes  will  be  saved  with  the  button 

“Save profile” (Figure 39).  

Figure 39. LCDP UI Prototype. Profile (created via Visily). 

The Schedules interface might be accessed through the menu on the left or 

if it appears on another UI. The all schedules on the farm are listed with its name, 

the  field  the  schedule  was  executed,  created  date  and  the  creator.  They  may  be 

filtered  and  the  data  regarding  them  may  be  checked.  Via  the  functional  person 

could create a specific schedule, choosing a field and area with the data. Crop will 

emerge  automatically.  Based  on  the  soil  state  the  system  could  automatically 

suggest  start  and  end  date  and  hardware,  actuators  and  controllers,  for  the  most 

optimal choice. However, users are capable of correcting the details. After adding a 

new  schedule,  the  process  will  start  automatically,  sending  a  notification  (Figure 

40).  

67 

 
 
Figure 40. LCDP UI Prototype. Scheduling process (created via Visily). 

The Notifications interface could be accessed through the menu on the left 

or  the  bell  icon  on  the  top  right  corner,  left  from  the  profile  icon.  All  the 

notifications  are  demonstrated  regarding  the  user  addition,  schedule  creation  and 

completion  and  report  emerging.  The  new  objects  are  clickable  and  route  to  the 

respective element (Figure 41).   

68 

 
 
 
Figure 41. LCDP UI Prototype. Notifications (created via Visily). 

The  Report  section  is  essential  for  the  user  to  see  the  results  of  the 

irrigation  and  have  data  for  the  further  actions.  Moreover,  these  results  are  also 

utilized by the system, expanding its database and enhancing in-built analytics. The 

interface  is  similar  to  the  scheduling  one  as  the  report  is  directly  linked  to it and 

formed based on this exact process. I suppose the report page will comprehend the 

data  about  the  irrigation  itself,  which  data  was  filled  when  creating the schedule, 

and  the  graphical  representation  of  numbers.  For  instance,  statistics  on  the  water 

usage  predictions and actual use throughout the hours of irrigation. Also the work 

of  hardware,  which  were  used  the  most  and  hence,  which  are  the  most  effective 

zones to place them. Sensors, weather, actuators and controllers data for the certain 

irrigation is available as well.  

It  is  possible  to  export  the  report  created  in  PDF  format  to  document  the 

results and use it as the official statement. To do so the button export is available at 

the top right corner (Figure 42). 

69 

 
 
Figure 42. LCDP UI Prototype. Report (created via Visily). 

3.3. COST ESTIMATION AND ECONOMIC EFFECT 

Cost estimation is the final step of my research, where I need to assess the 

financial model of the future LCDP. Even though in the thesis I primarily focus on 

the  investigation  of  the  LCNC  phenomenon  and  its  integration  in  the  agriculture 

industry,  I  need  to  realistically  suppose  the  technology  to  be  possibly  developed 

and deployed in terms of today's world and situation in Russia, helping to highlight 

the  economic  feasibility.  I  do  believe  in  the  practical  value  of  my  research,  so  I 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
want  to  calculate  the  cost  of  the  development  itself  and  development  time  spent, 

suggest the business model to monetize the solution and assess the outcome in the 

form  of  the  Net  Project  Value  (NPV)  and  IRR  (Internal  Rate  of  Return)  to 

understand the economic utility and technology perspectives.  

So,  first  of  all  I  need  to  predict  the  development  cost.  There  are  several 

sections,  which  include  different  parts  of  the  future  system.  The  hardware  stands 

for  the  basic  smart  irrigation  details,  essential  for  every  alike  system.  However, 

since  I  utilize the IoT sensors, the cost usually starts from $500 since they are the 

up-to-date  sensors  of  the  new  generation.  I  took  $2,000  for  each  as  the  average. 

The other hardware costs were retrieved from the paper, analysing the development 

of the low-cost smart irrigation system (Di Gennaro S. F. et al., 2024).  

The software components were the most difficult to calculate. For the ase I 

chose  the  article on the Smart Irrigation Management system proposition with the 

IoT  sensors  integrated  to  understand  which  parts  are  essential  to  include  when 

developing a LCDP (Hamdoon W. et. al., 2023). The most costly element was the 

platform  core  processes  development  itself,  costing  approximately  $8,000.  Other 

important  services  were  clouds,  servers,  smart  irrigation  modules,  data  analytics 

and dashboard and data protection, forming a total cost of $20,000 for the software 

block.  I  decided  to  outline  the  deployment  as  a  separate  block  where  the  testing 

and  primary support and maintenance were included.  

Finally,  labor,  the  most  expensive  block.  I  estimated  the  development 

period to be 8 months, and with the average salary on the market, it is roughly 65% 

of  the  development  costs.  The  team  is  pretty  basic  for  the  information  system 

development  process:  there  are  developers  with  different  areas  of  responsibilities 

(e.  g.  backend,  frontend,  application,  engineer),  integration  specialist,  who  is 

working with external services, agrotechnical specialist and UX/UI designer. 

The total initial investment is $129,775 (Figure 43). 

71 

 
Figure 43. LCDP prototype development cost breakdown. 

For  using 

the  LCDP 

technology 

I  decided 

to 

introduce 

the 

subscription-based  business  model  which  provides  recurring  revenue,  increasing 

with the number of users. There will be a fixed monthly payment for one enterprise 

with  possibility  to  refuse from the subscription any time. This method is the most 

suitable since the price will be affordable and could rise every 6 months since new 

updates  and  upgrades  are  about  to  be  introduced.  In  the  first  years  there  will  be 

small  improvements  and  bug  fixing.  These  costs  are  calculated  as  the  monthly 

expenses  in  the  next  two  figures.  However,  after  raising  some  funds  the  more 

sophisticated changes are going to be made.  

I  assess the initial price to be $450 or roughly 35,760 rubles in May 2025, 

with  gradual  increase  over  the  period  by  $50  (Figure  44).  The  calculations  are 

based on the survey results in Chapter 2, where 35,000 rubles was considered to be 

the  the  top  bar  of  the  minimum  price.  For  the  periods  the  months  were  taken  to 

track  the  profit dynamics in more detail. Initially, only 31 businesses would adopt 

the  LCDP  in  the  first  year.  But  with  the  steady  growth  the  number  is  going  to 

increase.  

72 

 
 
Based  on  the  cash  flows,  the  time  when  accumulated  profit  will  cover all 

the initial cost in the 15th month. The cash flow is calculated as the multiplication 

of the enterprises and monthly subscription minus the expenses, which are about to 

cover maintenance and small upgrades: 

Cash flow per month = subscription per entity*number of entities - monthly 

costs. 

However,  according  to  the  key  financial  indicators,  the  project  would  not 

pay  off.  Key  financial  indicators  I was assessing were NPV and IRR. Taking into 

account  this  cash  flows  with  average  discount  rate  of  10%,  the  NPV  was 

calculated, using the following formula: 

NPV = Σ (Net Cash flow / (1 + r)^t) - Initial Investment. 

And on the 15th month, presented on the table in Figure 44, the NPV is still 

negative and IRR is a little more than 0% (0.35%). 

Figure 44. Subscription business model breakdown over 16 months. 

Going further, I extended the period up to 30 months or 2.5 years. The cost 

is  about  to  gradually go up with more Russian agricultural SMEs getting to know 

the  LCDP  and  joining  utilizing  the  system.I  expect  the  price  to  rise  by  $50  each 

half  a  year.  And  after 24 months or 2 years there will be an increase by $100 as I 

expect  to  expand  costs  on  the  technology  for  the  more  rapid  support  and 

maintenance.  

And  only  on  the  30th  month  after  2.5  years  with  a  monthly  subscription, 

accounted for $700 and around 127 users per month, the project is going to pay off 

73 

 
 
with  NPV  and  IRR  being  $738.07  and  10%,  respectively  (Figure  45).  So,  it  is  a 

minimum timeframe to achieve consistency.  

Since it is a B2B system, I assume these numbers to be justified and could 

predict the enhanced financial values in the long run if the dynamics remains.  

Figure 45. Subscription business model breakdown over 30 months. 

Finally,  to  assess the economic effect and suppose why the platform could 

genuinely help SMEs to decrease associated costs, I decided to calculate the losses 

from  the  average Russian company, who are growing carrots in the European part 

of  Russia  with  mild  climate.  Starting with the salary, the average money a farmer 

gets in the agricultural sector was 52,600 rubles per month or $650 in 2023 (Yakov 

&  Partners,  2024).  According  to  the  survey  results,  shown  in  Chapter  2,  the 

majority of respondents were presenting the 16-50 workers size of the company, so 

I took approximately 20 workers as the operational one which could be reduced by 

20%. And the year savings are estimated up to $31,200, if leading the hypothesis 1. 

The  same  logic  for  the  water  costs.  The  price  in  the  European  region  is  roughly 

20-50  rubles  per  m^3,  or  40  cents  on  average.  The  carrots  demand  3000  m^3  of 

water  irrigated  per  hectare  in  one  season,  which  is  6-7  months  (YUGPOLIV, 

74 

 
 
2023).  The  average size of the yield for the SME is 200 hectares but I decided on 

100  since  the  bigger  yields  are still in the South, and in the European region they 

are smaller (RussianFarmland, 2023). Nevertheless, water savings are predicted to 

be up to $36,000 in accordance with hypothesis 1 (Figure 46).  

Figure 46. Possible savings of water and labour resources. 

These  numbers  are  calculated  to  be  in  the  long-run,  not  as  immediate 

results. And obviously adapting some piece of technology is not a guarantee for the 

cost  saving  and  efficiency  increase.  However,  this  approach  could  benefit  the 

enterprise  if  wisely  implemented  possibilities  of  the  LCDP,  adjusting  the 

instrument set specifically for the company needs.  

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 

To  conclude  my  research,  I  could  state  that  my  initial  research  aim  was 

achieved:  I  developed  the  prototype  of  the  low-code  development  platform  or 

LCDP  as  the  digital  approach  to the water irrigation management and monitoring 

system for Russian agricultural small and medium enterprises (SMEs). 

I had successfully completed the outlined tasks, set as my objectives. 

First  and  foremost,  I  did  literature research to investigate the technology I 

wanted  to  implement  and  the  industry,  both  in  the  global  context  and in terms of 

the  situation  in  Russia.  I  learnt  about  the  phenomenon  of  promising  low-code 

technology,  specifically  the  LCDP,  as  the  efficient  approach  for  software 

development to enhance the water irrigation management in Russian agriculture. I 

outlined  its  key  characteristics,  understanding  possible  benefits  and  drawbacks. 

The  analysis  proved  the  efficiency  of  the  solution  in  terms  of  reducing  time  and 

associated  costs,  which  could  be  utilized even by the non-technical specialists, so 

the adoption rate is about to be higher.  

The  agricultural  industry  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  least  digitized  sectors 

globally.  I  found  out  that  emerging  threats  in  the  environment  are  linked  to  the 

soon  water  shortage,  and  there  are  many opportunities for different sized farming 

businesses  to  develop  in  the  digital  vector,  accepting  new  efficient  solutions.  I 

observed the current global and national situation, common trends and perspectives 

of  the  LCDP  introduction  in  the  respective  sector,  focusing  on  the  small  and 

medium  companies.  Overall,  I  assessed  the  good  possibility  of  the  proposed 

technology adoption in Russian agriculture by SMEs.  

I reviewed the existing solutions in agriculture, mostly the U. S. origin one, 

since this country is more technologically advanced in the sector and concluded the 

key metrics in one single table, which comprehend the competitors. It was helpful 

to  observe  the  already  implemented  solution  with  similar  instrument  sets  and 

assess  their  efficiency.  Moreover,  Russian  technologies  were  observed  and 

technological gaps were identified since there are no smart irrigation systems with 

76 

 
 
the  fast  and  cheap  solution  delivery  which  could  be  achieved  via  the  LCNC 

designation. 

With  acquired  knowledge  I  could  prepare for primary data gathering from 

semi-structured  interviews  with  industry  specialists  as  a  qualitative  study.  4 

specialists  were  interviewed  from  different  parts  of  Russia  with  various  crops 

growing.  After  collection  the  results  were  coded  and  analysed  to  point  out major 

farmer’s issues and ideas. Deductive and inductive coding were applied, and then I 

identified  5  topics  via  the  thematic  analysis.  Farmers  are  already  using  some 

practices to increase efficiency but they are also eager to adopt more technologies. 

Still,  the  issues  may  be  linked to the moderate acknowledgement of the low-code 

as  the  software  building  tool.  Nevertheless,  the  interest  is  present  in  the  flexible 

solutions,  developed internally. In terms of this objective also outlined hypotheses 

based on the data available.  

I  conducted  a  survey  as  well  as  a quantitative study. I had 5 sections with 

one  Reference  for  explaining  the  solution  itself.  I  identified  the  portfolio  of  the 

respondents  and  their  attitude  towards  technology. It was the TAM framework, in 

which  elements  were  utilized  to  create  section  3  and  section  4,  as opinion on the 

technology  usefulness  and  simplicity,  respectively.  Also  I  asked  about  the  price 

expectation  of  the  LCDP.  As  for  the  results,  people  were mostly open to the new 

possibilities to adopt a profound platform, seeing the benefits of it. The main issue 

still  remains  low  acknowledgement  of  the  technology,  especially  among  older 

farmers.  

Eventually, I took all the gathered information and utilized it when building 

the  architecture  of  the  LCDP,  emphasizing  system  features  and  capabilities.  I 

designed  a  use  case  diagram,  activity  diagram,  class  diagram,  BPMN  and  built  a 

clickable user interfaces UI.  

Last  but  not  least,  I  estimated  the  Initial  investment  and  economic  effect 

with  key  financial  indicators.  I  suppose  the  full  development  cost  will  be  about 

$129,775.  The  system  will  be  available  via  the  subscription-based  monthly 

payments  of  $450  with  price  increasing  steadily  of  $50  over  time  (every  half  a 

77 

 
year) due to the improvements that are going to be made. Overall, the cash flow is 

going  to  cover  the  initial  investment  after  15  months  of  implementation,  but 

assuming the NPV to be positive, the value will be more than 0 after 30 months or 

2.5 years with 10% IRR. Since the average yearly savings on the water is estimated 

to  be  $31,200  and  on  labour  is  $36,000.  Even  assuming  the  minimum  price,  the 

subscription on the platform will benefit the farmers in the cost equivalent.  

Stating  my  limitations,  I  had  three  of  them:  availability  of  the  suitable 

professionals, resources and Russian market. The first is that only 4 people agreed 

to  be  interviewed.  The  problem  was  that  not  so  many  people  I  reached  had 

irrigation  systems  or  were  aware  of  the  operational  processes  and  company 

numbers.  And  since  I  was  developing  a  B2B  solution,  the qualified population is 

more  restricted,  that  is  why  in  the  quantitative  solution  the  sample  is  relatively 

small.  As  for  the  second,  I  thought  about  the  actual  development  and  testing  it. 

Unfortunately,  I  did  not  have  enough  resources  like  money  and sufficient time to 

fully realise the idea. Instead, I focused on the architecture design and the project. 

Finally,  the  system  is  applied  specifically  for  the  Russian  market  or  similar 

countries with sanctions imposed, for instance, like Belarus. 

Overall, the topic could be investigated further in the deployment direction, 

where  the  actual  IT-solution  may  contribute  to  the  efficient  resource  usage  and 

digitalization  of  agriculture.  The  research  could  be  a  base  for  the  more  profound 

solution,  developed  by  the  actual  professionals  in  the  LCDP.  Thus,  the  practical 

novelty of the study is proved, as it includes the potential to decrease water waste, 

enhance  efficient  usage  and  decrease  cost  production  for  the  enterprises, 

contributing to the national technological development.  

78 

 
 
REFERENCES 

1.  Alsaadi  H.  A.  et  al.  Factors  that  affect  the  utilization  of  low-code 

development  platforms:  survey  study 

//Romanian  Journal  of  Information 

Technology & Automatic Control/Revista Română de Informatică și Automatică. – 

2021. – Т. 31. – №. 3.  

2.  Amoussouhoui  R.  et  al.  Adoption  of  ICT4D  and  its  determinants:  A 

systematic review and meta-analysis //Heliyon. – 2024. – Т. 10. – №. 9. 

3.  Askaraliev  B.  et  al.  Development  of  modern  irrigation  systems  for 

improving  efficiency,  reducing  water  consumption  and 

increasing  yields 

//Machinery & Energetics. – 2024. – Т. 15. – №. 3. 

4.  Bang  J., Han J. W. Factors Influencing Farmers' Motivation to Adopt 

Smart  Farm  Technology  in  South  Korea  //arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2504.01795.  – 

2025. 

5.  Beksultanova  A.  I.,  Dzhankhotova  P.  M., Nosyreva A. N. The use of 

digital  technologies  in  agriculture  in  Russia  //BIO  Web  of  Conferences.  –  EDP 

Sciences, 2023. – Т. 71. – С. 01010. 

6.  Bank of Finland Institute for Emerging Economies (BOFIT). Russia’s 

2024  grain  harvest  falls  below  expectations  [Electronic  resource].  2025.  URL: 

https://www.bofit.fi/en/monitoring/weekly/2025/vw202501_1  

7.  Bootstrapped. Cut Costs and Save Time: Transform Agriculture Farm 

Records 

into 

Digital  Workflows 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

URL: 

https://bootstrapped.app/usecase/cut-costs-and-save-time-transform-agriculture-far

m-records-into-digital-workflows 

8.  Champness M. et al. Evaluating the performance and opportunity cost 

of  a  smart-sensed  automated  irrigation  system  for water-saving rice cultivation in 

temperate Australia //Agriculture. – 2023. – Т. 13. – №. 4. – С. 903. 

9.  Cleary,  E.  Digital  Agriculture  Technology  Adoption  &  Attitudes 

Study. – 2019. 

79 

 
 
10.  CodeEpsilon.  The  Influence  of  Low-Code/No-Code  Platforms  on 

Application 

Development 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2023. 

URL: 

https://www.codeepsilon.com/the-influence-of-low-code-no-code-platforms-on-ap

plication-development/ 

11.  de  Souza  A.  C.  M.  et  al.  IT Talent Shortage: Strategies to Mitigate a 

Blackout //Simpósio Brasileiro de Engenharia de Software (SBES). – SBC, 2024. – 

С. 499-509. 

12.  Di  Gennaro  S.  F.  et  al.  Development  of  a  low-cost  smart  irrigation 

system  for  Sustainable  Water  Management  in  the  Mediterranean  Region  //Smart 

Agricultural Technology. – 2024. – Т. 9. – С. 100629. 

13.  Diniz W. et al. The Skill Gap in Software Industry: A Mapping Study 

//Simpósio  Brasileiro  de  Engenharia  de  Software  (SBES).  –  SBC,  2024.  –  С. 

192-200.  

14.  Down to Earth. Demand for fresh water to be 40% higher than supply 

by  end  of  decade  –  UNGA  president  [Electronic  resource].  2023.  URL: 

https://www.downtoearth.org.in/water/demand-for-fresh-water-to-be-40-higher-tha

n-supply-by-end-of-decade-unga-president-87983  

15.  Dudin  M.  N.,  Lyasnikov  N.  V.  Problems  and  prospects  for  the 

development  of  peasant  (farmer)  farms  in  the  Russian  agro-industrial  complex  // 

Food Policy and Security. - 2022. - Т. 9. - №. 2. - С. 153-162. 

16.  FAS  USDA.  Production  Data:  Russia  [Electronic  resource].  URL: 

https://www.fas.usda.gov/data/production/country/rs  

17.  Forrester.  The  low-code  market  could  approach  $50  billion  by  2028 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2024. 

URL: 

https://www.forrester.com/blogs/the-low-code-market-could-approach-50-billion-b

y-2028/  

18.  Giagnocavo  C.  et  al.  A  multi-stakeholder  perspective  on  the  use  of 

digital  technologies  in  European  organic  and  agroecological  farming  systems 

//Technology in Society. – 2025. – Т. 81. – С. 102763.  

80 

 
19.  Global  Commission  on  the Economics of Water. Turning the Tide: A 

Call 

to 

Collective  Action 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2023.  URL: 

https://watercommission.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Turning-the-Tide-Report

-Web.pdf  

20.  Guresci  E.  et  al.  Feasibility  of  Low-Code  Development  Platforms  in 

Precision  Agriculture:  Opportunities,  Challenges,  and  Future  Directions //Land. – 

2024. – Т. 13. – №. 11. – С. 1758. 

21.  Hamdoon  W.,  Zengin  A.  A  new  IoT-based  smart 

irrigation 

management system //Middle East Journal of Science. – 2023. – Т. 9. – №. 1. – С. 

42-56. 

22.  Higher  School  of  Economics  Institute  for  Statistical  Studies  and 

Economics  of  Knowledge  (HSE  ISSEK).  News  Item  [Electronic  resource]. 2024. 

URL: https://issek.hse.ru/en/news/490486268.html  

23.  Kenneweg  B.  et  al.  Building  Low-Code  Applications  with  Mendix: 

Discover  best  practices  and  expert  techniques  to  simplify  enterprise  web 

development. – Packt Publishing Ltd, 2021.  

24.  Lebens  M.  et  al.  Rise  of  the  citizen  developer  //Muma  Business 

Review. – 2021. – Т. 5. – №. 12. – С. 101-111. 

25.  Lieberman  H.  et  al.  End-user  development:  An  emerging  paradigm 

//End user development. – Dordrecht : Springer Netherlands, 2006. – С. 1-8. 

26.  Mad  Devs.  Low-Code  vs  Traditional  Development:  Which  One  to 

Choose? 

2024. 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

URL: 

https://maddevs.io/blog/low-code-with-traditional-development/  

27.  McFadden  J.,  Casalini  F.,  Antón  J.  Policies  to  bolster  trust  in 

agricultural digitalisation: issues note. – 2022.  

28.  McKinsey  &  Company.  Global  farmer  insights  2024  [Electronic 

resource]. 

2024. 

URL: 

https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/agriculture/our-insights/global-farmer-insigh

ts-2024  

81 

 
29.  McKinsey  &  Company.  McKinsey  Technology Trends Outlook 2022 

[Electronic 

resource].  McKinsey  &  Company 

report. 

2022.  URL: 

https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/business%20functions/mckinsey%2

0digital/our%20insights/the%20top%20trends%20in%20tech%202022/mckinsey-t

ech-trends-outlook-2022-full-report.pdf 

30.  McKinsey  &  Company.  McKinsey  Technology Trends Outlook 2024 

[Electronic 

resource].  McKinsey  &  Company 

report. 

2024.  URL: 

https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/business%20functions/mckinsey%2

0digital/our%20insights/the%20top%20trends%20in%20tech%202024/mckinsey-t

echnology-trends-outlook-2024.pdf 

31.  Microsoft.  Low-code  signals  2023 [Electronic resource]. 2023. URL: 

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/power-platform/blog/2023/04/13/low-code-signa

ls-2023/  

32.  Miine,  L.K.,  Akorsu,  A.D.,  Boampong,  O.,  Bukari,  S.  Drivers  and 

intensity  of  adoption  of  digital  agricultural  services  by  smallholder  farmers  in 

Ghana // Heliyon. – 2023. – Vol. 9, No. 12. – Article e23023. 

33.  Parimi  S.  K.  K.  Impact  of  Low-Code/No-Code  Platforms  //Authorea 

Preprints. – 2025. 

34.  PolivTorg.  Preimushchestva 

ispolzovaniya 

tekhnologiy  sistemy 

SmartMole’s  [Benefits  of  using  SmartMole's  system  technologies]  [Electronic 

resource]. 

2024. 

URL: 

https://polivtorg.ru/company_services/preimushchestva-ispolzovaniya-tekhnologiy

-sistemy-smartmole-s/  

35.  RBC.  Digital  livestock  farmer:  how  information  technology  is 

changing 

the 

agro-industry 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2024. 

URL: 

https://www.rbc.ru/industries/news/675c3af29a79471b3e2a5de1  

36.  RBC  Kavkaz.  Article 

[Electronic 

resource].  2024.  URL: 

https://kavkaz.rbc.ru/kavkaz/13/11/2024/673468339a79478c6457f6ae  

37.  Rotz  S.  et  al.  The  politics  of  digital  agricultural  technologies:  a 

preliminary review //Sociologia ruralis. – 2019. – Т. 59. – №. 2. – С. 203-229. 

82 

 
38.  Russian-Farmland.com.  What  is  the  average  farm  size  in  Russia? 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

Informational 

article. 

2023. 

URL: 

https://russian-farmland.com/what-is-the-average-farm-size-in-russia.html 

39.  Smart Irrigation Georgia. Smart irrigation [Electronic resource]. URL: 

https://www.smartirrigationgeorgia.com/ 

40.  Smartrain.  Award-Winning  Smart  Irrigation  |  Smart  Rain  [Electronic 

resource]. URL: https://smartrain.net/ 

41.  Tadabase. What Is Citizen Development? [Electronic resource]. URL: 

https://tadabase.io/blog/what-is-citizen-development 

42.  TAdviser. Project: Russian Ministry of Agriculture (National Platform 

for 

Digital 

Agriculture) 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

URL: 

https://www.tadviser.ru/index.php/Проект:Минсельхоз_России_%28Нацплатфо

рма_Цифровое_сельское_хозяйство%29  

43.  The Washington Post. Deere, Caterpillar Exit Leaves Ukraine Farmers 

Facing 

Food 

Crisis 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2022. 

URL: 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/03/14/deere-caterpillar-ukraine-russi

a-agriculture-food-crisis/  

44.  UNESCO.  UN  World  Water  Development  Report  2024  [Electronic 

resource]. 

2024. 

URL: 

https://www.unwater.org/publications/un-world-water-development-report-2024  

45.  Upadhyaya  N.  Low-Code/No-Code  Platforms  and  Their  Impact  on 

Traditional Software Development: A Literature Review //No-Code Platforms and 

Their  Impact  on  Traditional  Software  Development:  A  Literature Review (March 

21, 2023). – 2023. 

46.  Vantiq. [Electronic resource]. URL: https://vantiq.com/  

47.  Vera  C.  G.  M.  et  al.  Low/No-code  development  platforms  and  the 

future of software developers //Minerva. – 2022. – Т. 1. – №. Special. – С. 21-33. 

48.  Walter  A.  et  al.  Smart  farming  is  key  to  developing  sustainable 

agriculture //Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. – 2017. – Т. 114. – 

№. 24. – С. 6148-6150. 

83 

 
49.  Wiseman L. et al. Farmers and their data: An examination of farmers’ 

reluctance to share their data through the lens of the laws impacting smart farming 

//NJAS-Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences. – 2019. – Т. 90. – С. 100301. 

50.  Wolfert  S.  et  al.  Big  data  in  smart  farming–a  review  //Agricultural 

systems. – 2017. – Т. 153. – С. 69-80.  

51.  WRI.  One-Quarter  of  World’s  Crops  Threatened  by  Water  Risks 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2024. 

URL: 

https://www.wri.org/insights/growing-water-risks-food-crops  

52.  Yakov  &  Partners.  Digitalizing  Russia’s  agricultural  sector: 

Challenges 

and 

solutions 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2023. 

URL: 

https://yakov.partners/upload/iblock/ed7/qj36pzjul41x0j241l3qdzb6mgr034g8/Digi

talizing-Russia_s-Agricultural-Sector-.pdf  

53.  Yakov  &  Partners.  Window of Opportunity 2.0 [Electronic resource]. 

2024. URL: https://yakovpartners.com/publications/okno-vozmozhnostey-2-0/  

54.  YUGPOLIV.  Drip 

irrigation  and  fertigation  –  main  elements 

[Electronic 

resource]. 

2023. 

URL: 

https://yug-poliv.ru/ovoschi-2/kapelnoe-oroshenie-i-fertigaciya-osn/  

55.  Zia H. et al. An experimental comparison of IoT-based and traditional 

irrigation scheduling on a flood-irrigated subtropical lemon farm //Sensors. – 2021. 

– Т. 21. – №. 12. – С. 4175. 

84 

 
 
 
APPENDIX 

APPENDIX 1. INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPT 

1.  Introduction 

Good afternoon! My name is Kseniia, I am a 4th year student of the Digital 

and Management Innovation program at the National Research University “Higher 

School  of  Economics”.  I  am  currently  writing  a  thesis  on  the  topic  “Low-Code 

Development  Platform  Prototype  Development  for  Irrigation  Management  in 

Russian  Agriculture”.  As part of the thesis, I am conducting a qualitative study to 

assess  the  water  resource  use  efficiency  of  small and medium-sized businesses in 

the  Russian  agricultural  industry  and  the  actual  application  of  practices  for 

optimization.  

Can  I  record  the  material  I  received  during  our  conversation to use in my 

final paper? Your personal data will be anonymized.  

Could you tell me how I can refer to you?  

2.  Respondents profiling 

Are you an individual or a representative of a company?  

If  a  company  representative:  Is your business classified as small/medium? 

Why? How many employees does the company have? 

What is your position and what do you do? Where? 

3.  Resource fund 

Question about resources: what is your cost/resource fund (percentage % of 

total costs purely for the operational expenses)? 

Which  percentage  of  your  total  costs  do  you  spend  specifically  on  water 

irrigation?  

Is this value optimal?  

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Water optimization practices and efficiency evaluation 

Have you ever applied any methods to optimize water costs?  

If  yes,  what  practices  or  technologies  have  you  used  to  optimize  water 

usage and, hence, costs?  

If yes, are these practices or technologies effective?  

If  yes,  is  there  monetary  or  percentage  data  which  could  demonstrate  the 

solution  effectiveness? If yes, provide examples of the results when implementing 

the practices (e.g. cost reduction/increased yields). 

5.  Perspective on the new practices introduction 

Would you like to improve water use efficiency? 

Have  you  thought  of  using  IT  or  digital  solutions  for  water  use 

optimization?  

Are you willing to use IT or digital solutions for water use optimization?  

If yes or already using, what is the main reason why you are willing to use 

or are willing to use IT or digital solutions for water optimization? 

What  could  be  or  are  the  barriers  and  constraints  that  prevent  you  from 

adopting new technologies?  

6.  Low-code in agriculture 

Have you heard of low-code technology?  

-  Low-code  is  a  technology  for developing a digital solution with minimal 

use  of  classical  programming  and  coding.  Instead  of  the  traditional  approach, 

visually clear elements, blocks and buttons on the interface are used, which can be 

interacted with by a user who does not have deep knowledge of programming.  

Do  you  know  some  examples  of  low-code  technology  implementation  or 

adoption in the agricultural sector?  

If yes, provide and briefly describe specific examples of its integration.  

I  propose  to  develop  a  low-code  development  platform  or  LCDP  to  meet 

the needs of the Russian agricultural industry. The platform will be used mainly for 

86 

 
 
 
digitalization  of  water  irrigation  systems.  A  smart  irrigation  management  and 

monitoring system for Russian farmers and SMEs will allow more efficient use of 

water and other resources in the possible future. What functions would you like to 

see in the water irrigation management and monitoring system?  

Thank  you  for  your  answers!  It  will  help  me  a  lot  in  my  research  and 

facilitate  the  introduction of digital technologies in the agricultural industry in the 

near future. 

87 

 
 
 
APPENDIX 2. SURVEY TRANSCRIPT 

Section 0. Introduction 

Good afternoon!  

My  name  is  Kseniia,  I  am  a  4th  year  student  of  the  Digital  and 

Management  Innovation  program  at  the  National  Research  University  “Higher 

School  of  Economics”.  I  am  currently  writing  a  thesis  on  the  topic  “Low-Code 

Development  Platform  Prototype  Development  for  Irrigation  Management  in 

Russian Agriculture”. As part of the thesis, I am conducting a quantitative study to 

assess  the  water  resource  use  efficiency  of  small and medium-sized businesses in 

the  Russian  agricultural  industry  and  the  actual  application  of  practices  for 

optimization. Your personal data will be anonymized.  

The survey consists of 4 sections. In the first one, it is required to answer 

questions related to the area of employment. The second one contains questions 

about the use of technologies to optimize processes. The third and fourth sections 

are devoted to the usefulness and ease of use of the development.  

The survey will take no more than 5 minutes of your time. Thank you! 

Section 1. General sample characteristics and stakeholder profile  

Your age? 

-  under 18 

-  18-24 

-  25-34 

-  35-44 

-  45-64 

-  over 65 

Are you an individual or a company representative? 

- 

Individual/self-employed 

-  Working in a small/medium enterprise 

88 

 
 
 
 
How many employees are there in the company? 

-  5 or less 

-  6-15 people 

-  16-50 

-  51-100 

-  101 or more 

What crops do you grow? 

-  grains 

-  vegetables 

-  gardening (fruits and berries) 

- 

- 

industrial crops 

fodder crops 

-  other 

Section 2. Using technology for processes optimization 

Are you using irrigation for crops watering? 

-  yes 

-  no 

Do  you/the  company  use  any  devices/technologies/practices  to  optimize 

processes? 

-  yes 

-  no 

Would  you  like  to implement a more technologically advanced solution to 

increase efficiency at a lower cost? 

-  yes 

-  no 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference  Section.  Low-code  technology  for  irrigation  management 

system development 

Low-code  is  a  technology  for  developing  a  digital  solution  with  minimal 

use  of  classical  programming  and  coding.  Instead  of  the  traditional  approach, 

visually clear elements, blocks and buttons on the interface are used, which can be 

interacted with by a user who does not have deep knowledge of programming.  

I  propose  to  develop  a  low-code  development  platform  or  LCDP  to  meet 

the needs of the Russian agricultural industry. The platform will be used mainly for 

digitalization  of  water  irrigation  systems.  A  smart  irrigation  management  and 

monitoring system for Russian farmers and SMEs will allow more efficient use of 

water  and  other  resources  in  the  possible  future.  I  believe  it  would  reduce 

associated costs, increase yields and diminish time to market, TTM (the time taken 

by  the  technology  from  the  idea  design  to  actual  deployment  of  the  digital 

solution).  

Section 3. Technology usefulness 

You  will  be  offered  statements  related  to  the  usefulness  of  the  future 

platform  for  irrigation  digitalization.  Please  rate  how  much  you  agree  with  the 

statements, where 1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree. 

Use  of  technology  will  reduce  water  costs  (1  - totally disagree, 5 - totally 

agree). 

-  1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

Use  of  technology will reduce labour costs (1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally 

agree). 

90 

 
 
 
 
-  1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

Use of technology will increase field yields (1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally 

agree). 

-  1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

Use  of  technology  will  decrease  production  time  to  market  (TTM)  (1  - 

totally disagree, 5 - totally agree). 

-  1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

Section 4. Technology ease of use 

You  will  be  offered  statements  related  to  the  ease  of  use  of  the  future 

platform  for  irrigation  digitalization.  Please  rate  how  much  you  agree  with  the 

statements, where 1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree. 

It  would  be  better  to  develop  the  information  system  internally  without 

attracting third parties (1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree). 

-  1 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

It would be easy for me to learn how to use a LCDP to create and adjust my 

own digital solutions (1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree). 

-  1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

I  have  all  the  devices  needed  to  use  the technology: mobile phone, laptop 

and/or computer (1 - totally disagree, 5 - totally agree). 

-  1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

Section 5. Financial part 

How much are you ready to pay monthly for this technology (in rubbles)? 

-  30 000 - 35 000 

-  35 000 - 45 000 

-  45 000 - 60 000 

-  60 000 - 80 000 

-  80 000 - 100 000 

92 

 
 
 
 
