National Research University Higher School of Economics 

Faculty of Computer Science 

Programme: Data Science and Business Analytics 

BACHELOR'S THESIS 

Software Project 

Applied Usage of RPA-Technologies for Improving the 
Efficiency of HR Process Management in Companies 

Prepared by the student of Group 211, Year 4 (year of study), 

Kholinov Roman Andreevich 

Thesis Supervisor: 

Kholinov Andrey Borisovich 

Moscow 

2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

This  paper  considers  the  application  of  Robotic  Process  Automation  (RPA) 

technologies  for  optimization  of  HR-department  processes  within  a  company.  The 

author of the paper determines which HR tasks have processes consisting of routine and 

repetitive manual work and proposes to speed them up with the help of software bots. 

Such  processes  usually  do  not  require  intellectual  involvement  of  employees  and 

making any decisions, so their fulfillment can be entrusted to an RPA-bot. The author 

of this paper has developed and tested three RPA-bots that are able to perform some of 

the resource-intensive HR tasks in shorter time intervals and with minimal employee 

involvement.  Based  on  the  resulting  measurements,  we  draw  a  conclusion  about  the 

effectiveness and usefulness of using RPA-technology for automating the work of HR 

department. 

1 

 
 
 
Contents 

Abstract ....................................................................................................................... 1 

List of Key Words ....................................................................................................... 3 

1. 

Introduction .......................................................................................................... 3 

2.  Problem statement ................................................................................................ 6 

3.  Relevance of the topic .......................................................................................... 6 

4.  Review of existing approaches and methods ......................................................... 9 

5.  Selection of the platform..................................................................................... 13 

5.1 Chapter conclusions ......................................................................................... 13 

6.  The plan for addressing the assigned task ........................................................... 14 

6.1 Database description ........................................................................................ 17 

6.2 RPA-bots description........................................................................................ 21 

6.2.1 Description of the bot for profile searching ................................................ 21 

6.2.2 Description of the bot for calculating salaries ............................................ 25 

6.2.3 Description of the bot for generating employment certificates ................... 26 

6.3 Chapter conclusions ......................................................................................... 29 

7.  Obtained results .................................................................................................. 30 

8.  Conclusions ........................................................................................................ 34 

8.1 Profile search ................................................................................................... 34 

8.2 Calculation of salary data ................................................................................. 35 

8.3 Employment certificate bot .............................................................................. 35 

8.4 Common conclusions ....................................................................................... 36 

9.  Further development ........................................................................................... 36 

10.  Reference list ...................................................................................................... 38 

11.  Appendix ............................................................................................................ 39 

11.1 Main Terminology and Definitions ................................................................. 39 

11.2 Link to the implemented RPA-bots (GitHub) ................................................. 40 

2 

 
 
List of Key Words 

Robotic Process Automation, Human Resources Management, Business Process 

Automation, Information technologies, Employee Onboarding. 

1. Introduction 

Productive  work  of  human  resources  departments  is  an  integral  part  of  the 

success  of  almost  any  modern  enterprise.  The  main  duties  of  HR  specialists  are  to 

search and select new qualified personnel, manage the process of evaluating the results 

of the accomplished work, develop and establish relationships between employees and 

divisions within the company, develop employee qualification improvement programs, 

eliminate  disputes,  and  maintain  the  corporate  culture. All  of  the  business  processes 

listed above, among other things, imply the performance of a huge number of various 

routine tasks of any complexity that are repeated every day in large volumes, which do 

not  require  the  performer  to  apply  cognitive  functions,  i.e.  decision-making.  Such 

routine operations can take up a significant amount of the total working time of their 

performers [1]. 

This report proposes the application of modern robotization process technologies 

to  improve  the  efficiency  of  human  resource  departments  of  enterprises  in  various 

industries.  It  is  planned  to  analyze  different  approaches  to  the  automation  of  human 

resources processes and tasks, and to compare information technologies currently used 

by  companies.  The  thesis  aims  to  show  the  advantages  of  RPA-technology  and 

efficiency in the use of program robots to accelerate and improve the quality of work 

of human resources departments. As a result of the thesis, the author is going to develop 

an RPA-solution consisting of a set of software robots, that implement the automation 

of part of the tasks of HR employees in order to improve the efficiency of the main 

business processes of this department. 

3 

 
Concerning the aims and objectives of the project, we are firstly trying to answer 

the question whether RPA technology can be useful to improve the efficiency of the HR 

department.  To  do  this,  we  need  to  analyze  where  robotic  process  automation  is 

applicable  in  particular,  what  advantages  this  technology  has,  and  why  it  might  be 

useful specifically in this case. After determining which HR processes are eligible for 

optimization  and  providing  an  explanation  of  why,  we  should  move  on  to  the 

development of RPA solutions to automate the selected processes. As a part of this, we 

should demonstrate the efficiency gains that can be achieved by using the RPA software 

bots that we develop. After completing the development of the RPA solution, a tangible 

comparison should be made in order to reflect the qualitative result of the completed 

work. 

This paper contains 10 chapters, starting with “Introduction”, where we discuss 

the general idea of the work, state its main aims and objectives.  

In the next chapter called “Problem statement” we identify the specific metrics 

by  which  we  should  evaluate  the  efficiency  that  we  have  achieved  as  a  result  of 

implementing our RPA-bots.  

In the chapter “Relevance of the topic” we take a brief overview of what exactly 

HR  departments  are  doing  in  a  company,  and  propose  the  application  of  RPA 

technology  to  speed  up  the  HR  processes  that  mainly  involve  repetitive  and  time-

consuming  labor.  By  demonstrating  the  presence  of  such  repetitive  processes,  we 

explain the importance and relevance of our work and demonstrate that it has a practical 

application.  

In  the  “Review  of  existing  approaches  and  methods”  we  provide  a  literature 

review for a number of academic articles,  related to the RPA technology, theoretical 

basis, practical cases of implementation, efficiency and possible risks.  

4 

 
Going further, in the “Selection of the platform” we are explaining our choice of 

the  RPA-platform  that  we  will  use  in  the  project.  In  this  chapter  we  state  the  main 

advantages of this software and provide a brief description of its functionality.  

In the chapter “The plan for addressing the assigned task”, we describe what HR 

processes we will optimize in our work: we clarify what these processes consist of, and 

how the use of robotization could improve the efficiency of their execution. Next, we 

provide a description and architecture of the database that we will use in our project, 

with  the  details  for  all  variables  and  tables.  In  this  chapter,  we  also  describe  the 

architecture  of  our  bots.  For  each  of  them,  we  outline  a  step-by-step  algorithm  that 

describes how they work and shows what exactly these bots do.  

In the chapter “Obtained results” we test our RPA bots on a number of different 

user queries and demonstrate the achieved results. In addition to that, we compare these 

results with those of an actual HR employee, who was assigned to perform the same 

tasks.  

Moving forward, in the “Conclusions” chapter we provide the outcomes that we 

drew from the obtained results. We discuss the insights that we have obtained for each 

of the three scenarios of robotization, and summarize the overall results of our work.  

Going on, in the “Future development” we speculate on the perspectives of the 

work  we  have  done  and  suggest  in  which  particular  directions  this  project  could  be 

continued. As for the potential perspectives, we describe the possibility of using our 

work  for  the  implementation  of  a  full-scale  automation  solution,  which  could 

comprehensively cover the HR tasks for organizations in specific industries.  

Finally,  the  “Reference  list”  contains  links  to  the  sources  that  have  been  used 

during the development of this project. 

5 

 
2. Problem statement 

We are trying to evaluate the effect that could be achieved by using RPA-bots to 

perform the routine and repetitive tasks of HR department. Thus, we want to estimate 

how much we can increase the execution speed of certain processes and how significant 

this  acceleration  may  be. We  are  also  interested  in  the  possibility  of  eliminating  the 

human-related mistakes while processes execution; an RPA-bot works according to a 

predetermined  algorithm,  unlike  a  human employee  who  may  make  mistakes  due  to 

inattention or fatigue. Thus, we are going to justify the utility of the completed work by 

the increased speed of the process execution and the reduced number of errors made. 

3. Relevance of the topic 

In order to assess the relevance of this task, we first need to dive into the existing 

processes and tasks performed by HR in modern companies. The first thing that should 

be discussed is what HR department is responsible for and what are its main functions 

and  aims.  Human  Resources  is  the  branch  in  a  company  that  is  responsible  for  the 

human  resource  management  —  in  other  words,  this  department  is  responsible  for 

maintaining the workforce in the organization. We can identify the main functions of 

the  HR  department  that  form  the  scope  of  its  responsibility:  personnel  management, 

recruitment, employee training and development, evaluation of personnel performance, 

compensation & benefit (C&B) [2]. Let’s make a brief overview of all of them. 

For  the  personnel  management,  it  involves  various  administrative  tasks  about 

employee’s performance. This usually includes maintaining employee’s data, operating 

with HR requests, setting up personal schedule and resolving conflicts that appear on 

the workplace. Going further, recruitment is one of the most important tasks performed 

by HR: it implies searching for the job candidates that fit company’s needs, evaluating 

their skills and hiring them. This task involves various complicated business processes 

related to vacancies planning, forming company’s requirements, checking resumes and 

6 

 
etc. Moving on to employee training and development, this function is responsible for 

investing  in  the  development  of  the  company  employees'  professional  skills  and 

competencies,  and  providing  them  with  the  opportunities  for  further  career  growth. 

Monitoring  employees'  progress  in  learning  new  material,  estimating  training  needs, 

and managing the organization's training processes are just a few  tasks where HR is 

involved in. The next important function of HR is to evaluate the efficiency and quality 

of staff performance. This task also breaks into several business processes that take a 

lot  of  time  from  HR  employees:  for  example,  designing  and  setting  KPI’s  (Key 

Performance  Indicators)  and  OKR’s  (Objectives  and  Key  Results),  collecting  and 

working on feedback from company workers, identify those who deserve a bonus and 

those who underperform, etc. Next, compensation and benefit (C&B) is a function that 

involves managing employee salary structure, assigning benefits and bonuses. The HR 

department  initiates  payments  and  also  monitors  the  timely  fulfilment  of  paychecks. 

Also,  they  should  track  the  market  salary  levels  to  maintain  competitiveness  and 

optimal wages. 

As we can see, a modern HR department handles many different tasks, and each 

of  them  consists  of  a  large  number  of  certain  business  processes  that  require  some 

amount  of  effort  from  HR  employees.  Moreover,  most  of  the  above  tasks  are  time-

consuming and resource-demanding for HR staff. If we take, for example, such a typical 

HR task as reviewing submitted resumes for a job and sending responses, we can notice 

how  long  this  process  could  be  if  it  is  done  manually.  Then  for  the  company's 

management it becomes clear that such sort of tasks as we mentioned above should be 

optimized: this is the point when modern IT solutions come up [3]. 

The  main  focus  of  this  work  is  the  utilization  of  Robotic  Process Automation 

(RPA) technology and its applicability for the task automation of HR business unit. RPA 

is a technology that allows to automate the execution of some repetitive and rule-based 

tasks  by  using  software  robots  (bots).  These  bots  do  repetitive  and  routine  work, 

7 

 
replacing human employees, and thus saving their time and resources while speeding 

up the entire working process, following the compliance and reducing the number of 

errors. RPA bots operate with other software through the API or directly through the 

user  interface. This  technology  has  received  a  lot  of  attention  in  the  last  decade  and 

many  large  companies  are  implementing  RPA  solutions  in  order  to  optimize  the 

performance of their various departmental processes. Currently there are many RPA-

vendors  that  are  leading  on  the  international  market;  for  example,  we  can  mention 

UiPath, Automation Anywhere, Blue Prism, Microsoft Power Automate and etc. On the 

Russian  market,  one  of  the  most  recognizable  local  solutions  is  Pix  RPA  platform; 

subsequently, we will implement our research aims using this particular software and 

later the choice of software will be explained. 

8 

 
 
 
4. Review of existing approaches and methods 

One  of  the  most  interesting  papers  on  this  topic  is  ‘Improving  Efficiency  and 

Effectiveness  of  Robotic  Process Automation  in  Human  Resource  Management’.  It 

describes the development of a human resource management system (HRMS) model 

using RPA-bots to optimize repetitive manual tasks. In this paper, the authors show a 

step-by-step methodology for developing an RPA solution, from process selection and 

preparation  to  testing  accuracy  and  speed  of  execution. As  for  results,  the  authors 

developed a number of RPA bots that optimize some HR-tasks related to operation with 

employee’s personal data. These bots are designed for gathering, storing and accessing 

data  from  the  database  and  performing  some  repetitive  tasks  using  this  data.  In  the 

conclusion of the paper, the authors emphasize the reliability of RPA bots in terms of 

accomplishing  their  tasks  in  comparison  to  real  employees.  The  reliability  and 

efficiency are especially noticeable for large amounts of work; the authors highlight the 

accuracy of bots in comparison to real employees, who tend to make mistakes when 

performing  large  tasks  due  to  fatigue  or  poor  attention.  As  a  result,  the  authors 

succeeded in developing an RPA solution that significantly accelerated the execution of 

HR processes and greatly reduced the amount of workload carried out by HR employees 

[4]. 

The article “The Future Digital Work Force: Robotic Process Automation (RPA)” 

explores  RPA  technology  as  a  solution  that  can  radically  change  the  approach  to 

automation of routine manual tasks. This paper explores the knowledge in this direction 

in details, giving possible implementation scenarios of RPA technology and illustrating 

them with real business cases of large companies. The authors of the paper give a brief 

overview of possible applications of RPA technology. In particular, they emphasize the 

possibility  of  using  software  bots  in  the  IT  sphere,  telecom,  financial  services  and 

banking, insurance industry, healthcare, manufacturing, and energy sector. The authors 

9 

 
note that in such different sectors we can find business processes that are quite similar 

in their nature and problematics, so they can be optimized by using software bots [5]. 

The article “Automating HR processes with Robotic Process Automation (RPA)” 

is  a  qualitative  review  of  the  application  of  RPA  technology  for  optimizing  HR 

processes with a focus on practical application. The article describes in details in which 

processes  of  HR  department  automation  with  the  help  of  software  bots  can  achieve 

maximum efficiency. The overview of this approach also covers its application in the 

financial sector, as well as integration with modern artificial intelligence systems and 

the possibility of using machine learning algorithms for other projects of a larger scale. 

The  author  concludes  that  with  the  use  of  RPA-technologies  there  will  be  a 

transformation of the roles of HR-employees in companies: they will have more time 

to focus on such things as talent management, organizational development and culture 

building,  while  processes  that  do  not  require  active  intellectual  work  could  be 

performed by software bots [6]. 

The article “Robotic Process Automation (RPA) as a Digitalization Related Tool 

To  Process  Enhancement  and  Time  Saving”  analyzes  RPA  technology  as  a  digital 

transformation tool for improving process efficiency. Special attention in the article is 

paid  to  business  cases  that  show  the  effectiveness  of  this  technology  in  different 

business  areas.  As  for  examples,  it  mentions  the  use  of  software  bots  for  data 

management,  optimization  of  document  preparation  process  and  automation  of 

financial  calculation  processes. A  significant  part  of  the  paper  is  focused  on  SWOT-

analysis for RPA-technology. The author has conducted a comprehensive study of the 

strengths  and  weaknesses  of  this  technology,  as  well  as  identified  potential 

opportunities  and  threats. As  strengths,  the  author  notes  significant  cost  reduction, 

increased business efficiency and quality of work, as well as employee satisfaction and 

faster  job  completion. As  weaknesses  of  RPA-technology  the  author  pointed  out  the 

need to intervene in the work of program bots in case of errors, as well as the need for 

10 

 
high quality data. Potential opportunities of RPA-technology are integration with AI, 

solving problems with staff shortages and transformation of employee roles in favor of 

more  intellectual  work.  Possible  threats  are  the  emergence  of  specialized  software 

solutions that make the development of RPA-bots less useful, problems with change 

management in companies and development problems. As a conclusion of this work, 

the  author  emphasizes  that  the  use  of  RPA  can  bring  real  economic  and  operational 

benefits  to  a  company  if  the  processes  to be  automated  are  properly  chosen  and  the 

potential threats are taken into account [7]. 

The article “Risks Associated With Robotic Process Automation” analyzes the 

potential risks that emerge during the application of RPA-technology. The authors have 

performed a detailed review of other works and business cases on the topic of software 

robotization, as a result of which several classifications of possible risks associated with 

the RPA implementation were presented. The authors focus on several key risks that 

affect the overall success from the use of software bots; these risks include technology 

risks, human factors, financial risks, and the risks of making the incorrect choices of 

business processes to automate. Technology risks include software compatibility issues, 

security  issues,  and  vulnerabilities  due  to changes  in  interface  design  (especially  for 

bots  that  are  interacting  with  web  forms).  The  human  factor  involves  change 

management problems, such as resistance to change from employees and lack of staff 

competence  in  dealing  with  new  technology.  Regarding  financial  risks,  the  authors 

mention  that  expectations  of  cost  reductions  are  often  overstated.  Furthermore,  they 

mention  the  waste  of  resources  in  the  development  of  an  obviously  unsustainable 

automation  project. Among  other  things,  the  authors  highlight  the  risks  of  choosing 

unsuitable  processes  for  automation;  often  customers  do  not  understand  what  RPA 

technology is used for and to which processes it can be applied, which leads to costly 

and  inefficient  projects.  The  authors  conclude  their  work  with  the  opinion  that  the 

adoption of RPA technology requires not only an understanding of the technical aspects, 

11 

 
but  also  business  knowledge  and  a  proper  assessment  of  all  potential  risks  for  each 

particular case [8]. 

12 

 
 
 
5. Selection of the platform 

As previously mentioned, the RPA-platform Pix RPA was chosen to implement 

the  stated  objectives.  One  of  the  key  advantages  of  this  platform  is  its  flexible  and 

convenient interface, which allows not only to write your own scripts in C#, but also to 

take advantage of low-code systems, in particular, to use the built-in activities. Having 

such a variety of standard activities, as well as documentation for each of them, makes 

the development process much simpler. Thus, due to the combination of the advantages 

of the low-code platform and the C# language, we can develop our scripts significantly 

faster.  Another  remarkable  advantage  is  flexibility  and  scalability.  This  platform 

provides all the tools essential for working with attended and unattended bots (attended 

bots – run in user environment, unattended bots – run mostly on the server side without 

user interaction); in addition, there are also necessary activities for the integration with 

the  web  browsers  and  operating  system  elements,  as  well  as  various  assets  for 

integration  with  databases  engines  (MS  SQL  Server,  Oracle,  PostgreSQL,  MySQL, 

etc.), messengers (WhatsApp, Telegram, etc.), office application packages, and so on. 

In addition, this  vendor of this software is  a Russian company, which minimizes the 

possible problems with licensing and allows to get technical support and maintenance 

much faster. 

5.1 Chapter conclusions 

As  a  result  of  this  chapter,  we  decided  to  select  Pix  RPA  platform  for  the 

implementation  of  our  project.  This  particular  software  fits  all  our  requirements, 

including  the  integration  with  MSSQL  databases  engine  and  Microsoft  Office.  In 

addition to that, it is possible to use an add-on activity for setting up the integration with 

Telegram messenger: this is especially beneficial if we want to organize the data input 

for one of our bots in a dialog format.  

13 

 
6. The plan for addressing the assigned task 

We  also  should  outline  where  exactly  the  RPA  technology  can  be  applied. As 

stated earlier, this technology includes the creation of software bots that can emulate 

the work of a human employee in routine and repetitive tasks. Thus, we can suggest the 

following  types  of  tasks  that  can  be  handled  by  this  technology:  routine  (repetitive, 

identical) tasks with lots of iterations, structured rule-based tasks, and tasks involving 

dealing with large amounts of data, as well as on-demand manual tasks. In addition, 

RPA technology is extremely effective in building integration with legacy or custom-

developed  systems (usually, such systems  do not have integration points like API or 

web-services) [9].  

We  need  to  conduct  an  analysis  of  HR  tasks  that  would  show  us  for  which 

specific processes we could apply RPA technology. From our list, the most appropriate 

process for robotization is the process of recruiting new staff. The process of hiring new 

employees necessarily involves a search for candidates. Often, the search for specialists 

is being performed through special job portals, where candidates post their  CVs and 

express  their  desire  to  find  a  job  in  a  particular  area.  The  candidate  search  process 

includes the selection of profiles that meet the needs and policies of the company. This 

process  fits  perfectly  with  the  description  of  the  process  for  robotization  that  we 

outlined  above;  it  is  a  routine,  time-consuming  activity  that  involves  gathering 

information  about  potential  job  candidates  and  saving  that  information  for  later 

processing and communication with them. Thus, we can develop a software bot that 

searches for the specific profiles for the required parameters and then saves the obtained 

data  into  an  Excel  document  or  a  database.  We  will  develop  our  solution  based  on 

priorities on the Russian market. In Russia, one of the most popular employee search 

portals is HeadHunter's “hh.ru” service. Thus, we have to develop a bot that interacts 

with the Web-interface of the “hh.ru” portal and emulates the work of an HR employee. 

14 

 
Moving  on  from  this,  Compensation  and  Benefits  (C&B)  HR  unit  also  has 

suitable processes for robotization. This field of activity of the HR department involves 

working with data and calculating certain indicators. Among these processes, there are 

the  ones  that  are  repeated  at  certain  intervals,  calculating  values  according  to  some 

certain pattern or template. One of the examples of such processes can be the calculation 

of employee salaries in a form of “Base salary plus variable commission”. This type of 

salary  implies  that  an  employee  has  a  fixed  monthly  salary,  as  well  as  bonuses  or 

commissions for the completed deals and sales made at the end of every month. Often 

this form of salary is applied to  employees of sales department, where the bonus for 

each sale is calculated according to some coefficient (not necessarily constant for each 

deal). This  process  perfectly  fits  the  criteria  that  we  have  established  earlier;  in  this 

case, the human work could be replaced by a bot that accesses the company's database, 

looks up the necessary information for each employee, and calculates their full monthly 

salary (the sum of salary and commission). This bot can save a considerable amount of 

time  that  an  ordinary  HR  employee  usually  spends  on  searching  the  database  and 

calculating salaries manually. 

Another activity that we want to automate is personnel management. As we have 

described  earlier,  the  responsibilities  of  HR  employees  include  the  preparation  of 

various  documents  requested  by  company  employees.  One  of  such  documents  is  a 

certificate  of  employment.  Such  certificates  are  often  made  according  to  the  same 

template, they contain personal information about the employee and his/her position in 

the company. The preparation of such documents and their equivalents is often a routine 

activity that HR department employees perform upon the requests of the company staff. 

This process is an on-demand manual process, which involves extracting the necessary 

information  about  the  employee  and  drafting  a  document  based  on  a  template.  Such 

work  could  also  be  replaced  by  some  kind  of  an  RPA-bot  that  would  access  the 

company's  employee  directory  (a  database, Active  Directory,  ERP  system,  etc.)  and 

15 

 
then prepare a compiled document of the specified format (usually, Microsoft Excel, 

Word or .pdf document). This is another good example of a process where the usage of 

RPA technology impacts the company a lot, with greater efficiency. Implementing the 

interaction with an RPA-bot via a popular messenger (for example, Telegram), we can 

reduce  the  total  time  spent  by  a  company  employee  for  communication  with  HR 

department, thereby freeing the latter from the time-consuming task, that they can spend 

for more intellectual work.  

It is also worth mentioning the other HR tasks we described at the beginning of 

our study. When we are trying to automate certain processes, we should always keep in 

mind for what exactly  our approaches are used. In our case, we first outlined where 

exactly  RPA  technology  is  applicable,  and  then  listed  the  processes  in  the  HR 

department  where  this  technology  can  give  a  significant  increase  in  productivity. 

Regarding  employee  training  and  development,  this  process  mostly  requires  a 

personalized  approach  to  each  employee.  This  means  that  in  order  to  effectively 

perform  these  duties,  an  individualized  approach  to  each  particular  case  is  essential. 

This type of tasks does not contain repetitive and identical elements, but on the contrary, 

require a lot of intellectual resources. Thus, in this type of HR tasks robotization is not 

applicable by its definition. Moving on to the evaluation of personnel performance, here 

the  question  is  raised  about  the  advisability  of  using  the  RPA-technology  for  this. 

Unlike all previous HR tasks, there are plenty of software solutions for performance 

evaluation that allow managers to calculate the necessary coefficients quickly. This is 

a  whole  separate specialty  that  has  its  own  software  and  its  own  unique  methods  of 

evaluation and visualization of outcomes. RPA technology focuses more on automating 

certain actions within business processes and speeding up manual work. Thus, RPA-

technology will not be the most effective solution in this area, as it does not fit the main 

criteria in which this type of automation is used. 

16 

 
To store the data of this project securely and performing data management, we 

will need to use a database. We will use MS SQL server, which will have an architecture 

that  simulates  the  database  of a  real  organization. We  will  use  synthetic  data,  as  the 

purpose of our project is first of all to demonstrate the effectiveness of RPA-technology 

application in the field of HR. 

Below you can see a visualization of the database architecture we will use in our 

work, as well as comments on each table and the descriptions for the variables [Fig.1]. 

Fig. 1. Database diagram of the project 

 6.1 Database description 

Employees – this table contains information about company’s staff. It includes 

employee’s full name, contact data and dates of birthday, hiring and retirement (last one 

for the case if some employee had left the company). Description is presented on Table 

1. 

17 

 
 
 
Table 1. Employees table 

Column name 
EmployeeID 
LastName 
FirstName 
MiddleName 
BirthDate 
HireDate 
RetireDate 

Phone 
Email 
Address 

Description 
ID of an employee (primary key, autoincremented) 
Last name of an employee 
First name of an employee 

Datatype 
int 
nvarchar(50) 
nvarchar(50) 
nvarchar(50)  Middle name of an employee 
date 
date 
date 

Birth date of an employee 
Day when employee was hired 
Day when employee retired and left the position (empty 
for employees who are not retired) 
Phone number of an employee 
Active email of an employee 

nvarchar(50) 
nvarchar(50) 
nvarchar(255)  Address of an employee 

Sales – this table contains a historic data about successful sales made. Each sale 

is supervised by one of the company’s employees, so  his/her name is saved, together 

with  the  monetary  amount  of  sale  and  the  commission  percentage,  assigned  to  the 

salesman. Description is presented on Table 2. 

Table 2. Sales table 

Column name 
SaleID 
EmployeeID 

SaleDate 
Amount 
Commission 

Datatype 
int 
int 

Description 
ID of the sale (primary key, autoincremented) 
ID of an employee who is responsible for this sale 
(foreign key) 
Date when sale happened 

datetime 
decimal(18, 2)  Sale amount 
decimal(18, 2)  Commission percentage for the salesman 

SalaryData  –  this  table  contains  a  historic  data  about  payrolls.  For  each 

particular payroll, it contains the ID of a recipient, date when payroll was made and the 

total amount paid. Description is presented on Table 3. 

Table 3. SalaryData table 

Column name 
SalaryID 
EmployeeID 
SalaryDate 
TotalSalary 

Datatype 
int 
int 
datetime 
decimal(18, 2)  Total amount of salary 

Description 
ID of the payroll (primary key, autoincremented) 
ID of an employee who receives this salary (foreign key) 
Date when the salary was paid 

18 

 
 
 
EmploymentCertificatesLog  –  this  table  contains  a  historic  data  about 

employment certificates that were created. For each log, there is an ID of a certificate, 

ID of an employee who ordered it, date of creation and an explanation of the purpose 

for creating this certificate (in text form). Description is presented on Table 4. 

Table 4. EmploymentCertificatesLog table 

Column name 
LogID 
CertificateID 
EmployeeID 

Datatype 
int 
int 
int 

DateOfCreation 
Purpose 

datetime 
nvarchar(255) 

Description 
ID of the log (primary key, autoincremented) 
ID of the certificate  
ID of the employee who ordered the certificate (foreign 
key) 
Date when the certificate was created 
Purpose for giving this certificate 

EmployeePositions  –  this  table  is  a  technical  one,  it  was  created  in  order  to 

simplify  Many-To-Many  relation  between  tables  Employees  and  Positions.  For  each 

relation, it contains ID of employee and an ID of this employee’s position. Description 

is presented on Table 5. 

Table 5. EmployeePositions table 

Column name 
ID 
EmployeeID 

Datatype 
int 
int 

PositionID 

int 

Description 
ID of connection (primary key, autoincremented) 
ID of the employee who occupies a certain position 
(foreign key) 
ID of the position taken by a particular person (foreign 
key) 

Positions  –  this  table  contains  information  about  all  positions  that  exist  in  a 

company. For each position, there is an ID of the department in belongs to, its full title 

and fixed salary. Description is presented on Table 6. 

Table 6. Positions table 

Column name 
PositionID 

Datatype 
int 

DepartmentID 

int 

Description 
ID of a certain position in the company (primary key, 
autoincremented) 
ID of the department to which the position belongs to 
(foreign key) 

19 

 
 
 
PositionTitle 
FixedSalary 

nvarchar(255)  Name of the position  
decimal(18, 2)  Fixed amount of salary assigned to this position 

Departments  –  this  table  contains  information  about  the  departments  in  the 

company. For each ID in this table, there is a full title of the department. Description is 

presented on Table 7. 

Table 7. Departments table 

Column name 
DepartmentID 
DepartmentName 

Datatype 
int 
nvarchar(255)  Name of the department 

Description 
ID of the department (primary key, autoincremented) 

CandidateSearchParams - this table contains the ID of the launch, as well as 

the selected parameters that user has specified. Description is presented on Table 8. 

Table 8. CandidateSearchParams table 

Column name 
SearchID 
SearchRole 

Datatype 
int 
nvarchar(500) 

Description 
ID of bot launching (primary key, autoincremented) 
Specialization of the employee the company is looking 
for 

SearchCountry 
SearchGender 
SearchStatus 
RelocationStatus 
WorkExperience 
AgeFrom 
AgeTo 
VacancyCount 

Job search status given by the candidate 

nvarchar(200)  Citizenship of the candidate 
nvarchar(200)  Gender of the candidate 
nvarchar(200) 
nvarchar(200)  Candidate's status regarding relocation 
nvarchar(200)  Candidate’s work experience 
nvarchar(200)  The minimum age of the candidate 
nvarchar(200)  The maximum age of the candidate 
nvarchar(200)  Number of profiles searched during the launching 

CandidateSearch  –  this  table  contains  data  on  searched  profiles,  which  were 

obtained by using our bot. The primary key is VacancyID, which is the identifier of the 

found profile; SearchID contains the bot launch identifier, during which this profile was 

found. This table includes the title of the profile and brief personal information about 

the candidate, as well as his/her specialization, work experience, education, expected 

20 

 
 
 
 
salary, citizenship, place of residence and a link to this profile on “hh.ru”. Description 

is presented on Table 9. 

Table 9. CandidateSearch 

Column name 
VacancyID 
SearchID 

ResumeTitle 
PersonalInfo 
Speciality 
WorkingExperience 
Education 
ExpectedSalary 
Citizenship 
Location 
ResumeURL 

Datatype 
int 
int 

Description 
ID of the profile (primary key, autoincremented) 
ID of the search in which the profile was found (foreign 
key) 
nvarchar(255) 
Title of the profile 
nvarchar(MAX)  Brief information about the candidate 
nvarchar(1000)  Candidate specialization 
nvarchar(MAX)  Working experience of the candidate 
nvarchar(MAX)  Brief information about the candidate's education 
nvarchar(255) 
nvarchar(255) 
nvarchar(500) 
nvarchar(500) 

Candidate’s expected salary (if provided) 
Candidate’s citizenship 
Candidate’s place of living 
URL to the original profile 

6.2 RPA-bots description 

 6.2.1 Description of the bot for profile searching 

•  The bot starts with generating an ID of the launch, and then allows the user to set 

up  the  parameters  in  the  dialog  window  for  searching  the  required  profiles 

[Fig.2]. After  entering  the  parameters  and  the  number  of  vacancies,  the  user 

clicks “OK” button, and then the bot performs all the searching job on its own.  

•  Bot starts its search by launching the Google Chrome browser and navigating to 

the “hh.ru” portal via the URL address. This address was previously constructed 

according to the parameters that user entered in the form.  

•  Bot loads the page where the required profiles are listed one by one [Fig.3]. In 

this representation the majority of required data is listed on the page, so our bot 

starts parsing. Initially, bot scans all the data using the XPath, and stores it in 

temporary files; then it processes the data for each particular profile, removing 

the unnecessary constructions and saving the obtained data in the resulting Excel 

document. During the process described above, the bot obtains the information 

21 

 
 
about the resume title, specialization, working experience, education, citizenship, 

current location and link to the original resume. Candidate’s brief description and 

expected salary are listed inside each of these profiles, so our bot needs to iterate 

through all of them and collect this data.  

•  Bot navigates the profile links one by one and collects data about the candidate 

and  the  preferred  salary  [Fig.  4].  On  this  stage,  bot  has  prepared  an  Excel 

document that was requested by user, with styles and all necessary information 

for the candidates [Fig. 5].  

•  The last step is saving all the data to the company’s database. For this, bot uses 

the Pix RPA platform’s built-in activity for interaction with databases. The bot 

creates an SQL query and saves the resulting table to the database, additionally 

putting the ID of the search in a separate column.  

•  After performing all the above operations, the bot closes the Chrome browser. 

Fig.2. Input form 

22 

 
 
Fig.3 "hh.ru" portal page, bot navigates it after obtaining the search parameters 

Fig.4 Interface of the profile page 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5 Resulting Excel table with collected profiles 

The profile data that was saved to the company’s database could be used on the 

further stages of approval by HR employees, so we decided to demonstrate the usability 

of our RPA-bot by adding to our project a web-interface for interacting with collected 

data [Fig. 6]. The interface that we have developed could be used for finding vacancies 

among those ones that were collected by our bot. The web form was done with K2 Low-

Code  Designer,  which  makes  it  very  easy  to  develop  the  interface  and  set  up  the 

communication with the database without any coding.  

24 

 
 
Fig. 6 Web-interface for interacting with collected data 

6.2.2 Description of the bot for calculating salaries 

•  The bot starts with opening a form for initial details input by the user [Fig.7]. On 

this  form  a  user  can  select  some  particular  year  and  month,  for  which  he  can 

calculate salaries of the employees. After the form is completed, the user clicks 

“OK” to initiate the calculation process. 

•  Bot  starts  execution.  It  makes  a  request  to  the  company’s  MSSQL  server. To 

calculate salaries and outputting the amount for the month, bot needs to find out 

the performed sales activities of company’s employees, get their fixed salaries 

corresponding to their roles and calculate the total commission and total salary.  

•  The  resulting  data  is  saved  to  the  Excel  spreadsheet  which  is  being  generated 

from the template and may contain some corporate styling [Fig. 8].  

•  The bot sets up a correct data format for the columns (monetary values in Russian 

rubles). 

25 

 
 
 
•  The bot saves the file and stops execution. 

Fig. 7 Form for input data from the user 

Fig.8 Salaries that were calculated by the bot and presented in an Excel format 

6.2.3 Description of the bot for generating employment certificates 

This bot will perform communication with a user via Telegram messenger, and 

generate the employment certificate by addressing company’s database. We decided to 

organize the architecture of this bot in the following way: we have created a master 

RPA-script that is responsible for integration with Telegram messenger and dialog with 

users and a sub-bot responsible for generating certificates that can be triggered by the 

master.  The  sub-bot  obtains  the  parameters  that  user  imputed  via  chat,  gets  all  the 

necessary  information  from  a  company’s  database  and  generates  an  employment 

certificate.  

26 

 
 
 
 
For the master bot we have used an activity called “Telegram Manager” that was 

introduced by Pix Robotics company. We created a chat for our bot by using the special 

Telegram services, and used a generated security token to connect to it.  

•  To start a dialog with our bot, a user needs to write a greeting word to the chat; 

the  bot  will  respond  with  brief  instructions  on  how  to  enter  the  required  data 

properly [Fig. 9]. Each step of communication is denoted by some state value, 

which is stored in an integer variable.  

•  When the dialog with the user progresses to the next stage, our bot goes to the 

next state and executes its commands [Fig. 10]. If an error occurred on some of 

the states due to the wrong format of inputted data, bot will inform the user and 

ask to re-apply the application for employment certificate. Bot saves states for 

each user independently (using dictionary): this means that bot could be used by 

several people at one time.  

•  For  the  script  that  generates  the  employment  certificates,  it  starts  with 

establishing  a  connection  to  the  database and  creates  a  request  to  the MSSQL 

server of the company. It is necessary for obtaining employee’s position, ID, date 

of  hiring  and  size  of  salary;  this  data  will  be  used  to  generate  the  required 

document.  

•  Then script fills the document according to the predefined template given by the 

company,  inserts  all  the  necessary  data  and  obtains  the  ID  of  the  resulting 

employment certificate.  

•  The bot saves the resulting document to the predefined folder, where it can be 

picked  up  by  the  master script  that  is  responsible  for  the  communication  with 

Telegram.  

•  After this, the generated document is sent to the user via the messenger [Fig. 11].  

27 

 
 
Fig.9 User initiates dialog with the bot 

Fig.10 Interaction with the bot via the messenger 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11 Example of the generated employment certificates for one of the employees of the company. The screenshot is taken from the 
PDF document that was generated by the RPA-bot 

6.3 Chapter conclusions 

In this chapter, we have outlined the specific HR tasks that are addressed by our 

RPA-bots. Additionally, we have given a detailed structure of our project. For each of 

the  selected  categories  of  tasks  that  we  have  chosen  as  suitable  for  robotization,  we 

have picked the specific HR duties that we will work with, and for which we aim to 

reach the maximum efficiency. Within the separate paragraphs, we have described the 

database architecture that we used in our project, as well as provided  the descriptions 

of how each of our RPA-bots is operating. We have categorized the operation process 

of each of the bots into the separate points, and demonstrated the way each of our RPA-

scripts  works.  As  a  result  of  this  chapter,  we  have  developed  the  three  RPA-bot 

according to the architecture that we have described in these paragraphs.  

29 

 
 
Links to the RPA-scripts are published on GitHub, and could be accessed by the 

link that is stated in the Appendix [11]. URL of the web-form for reviewing results of 

profile searching is stated in Appendix [12]. 

7. Obtained results 

In  order  to  demonstrate  the  effectiveness  of  our  bots,  we  should  test  their 

functionality, record their time of execution and evaluate the result. For our case, the 

most  representative  comparison  is  to  compare  the  results  of  our  test  with  the  real 

activities of human employees. In order to perform this task, I decided to collect  the 

data from an HR-specialist in the company where I work. The HR-employee should 

perform the same tasks with the same input parameters as the bot will do. We will focus 

our attention mostly on the execution time; also, we will validate the obtained result for 

errors and ensure the quality of the results. 

Analyzing  the  performance  of  the  first  bot,  I  decided  to  do  the  following.  I 

decided to design nine different candidate requests; they are presented in the Table 10 

below.  

Table 10. Requests for the first bot 

Request 
number 

Position 

Citizenship  Gender 

Request 1  ML-Engineer  Russia 

Female 

Request 2 

Request 3 

Frontend-
developer 

.NET 
developer 

Russia 

Male 

Russia 

Male 

Request 4 

System 
Analyst 

Request 5  Web-

developer 

Any 

Any 

Russia, 
Kazakhstan, 
Belarus, 
Armenia, 
Azerbaijan  
Russia, 
Kazakhstan, 
Belarus 

Relocation 

Live in their 
place or ready 
to relocate 
Live in their 
place or ready 
to relocate 
Live in their 
region 

Search 
status 

Looks 
for offers 

Looks 
for offers 

Actively 
searches 
for the 
job 
Looks 
for offers 

Work 
experience 

1-3 years 

Age: 
lower 
bound 
20 

Age: 
Upper 
bound 
- 

Number 
of 
profiles 
4 

3-6 years 

25 

1-3 years 

20 

50 

40 

5 

6 

8 

Live in their 
region 

- 

30 

45 

1-3 years 

25 

- 

10 

Actively 
searches 
for the 
job 

Live in their 
place or ready 
to relocate 

30 

 
Request 6 

System 
Administrator 

Russia 

Male 

- 

Request 7 

Data-
Engineer 

Russia 

Male 

Request 8 

DevOps-
Engineer 

Russia 

Male 

Request 9 

Tester 

Russia 

Male 

Looks 
for offers 

Looks 
for offers 

Looks 
for offers 

Live in their 
place or ready 
to relocate 
Not living in 
the region, 
ready to 
relocate 
Live in their 
place or ready 
to relocate 
Live in their 
place or ready 
to relocate 

3-6 years 

- 

50 

12 

- 

- 

- 

21 

49 

14 

25 

49 

16 

- 

40 

18 

These  requests  will  be  offered  to  both  the  real  employee  and  the  bot  I  have 

created. In the Table 11 below you can find the resulting outcomes. 

Table 11. First scenario results 

Request 1  Request 2  Request 3  Request 4  Request 5 

Request 6 

Request 7  Request 8  Request 9 

Human 
HR-
employee 

RPA-bot 

12 min 44 
sec 

14 min 58 
sec 

17 min 34 
sec 

21 min 18 
sec 

24 min 14 
sec 

26 min 34 
sec 

27 min 21 
sec 

28 min 5 
sec 

28 min 44 
sec 

1 min 10 
sec 

1 min 17 
sec 

1 min 30 
sec 

1 min 56 
sec 

2 min 36 
sec 

2 min 53 
sec 

2 min 58 
sec 

3 min 46 
sec 

4 min 2 
sec 

For the second bot, the task is to make a calculation of employee salaries for five 

months randomly selected by me. These months are indicated in the Table 12 below. 

Table 12. Requests for the second bot 

Request name 

Request 1 

Request 2 

Request 3 

Request 4 

Request 5 

Year 

2024 

2024 

2024 

2025 

2025 

Month 

May 

August 

November 

January 

March 

For comparison, a real employee is given the exact same task with the same dates. 

The results by time are presented in the Table 13 below. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 13. Results for the second scenario 

Request 1 

Request 2 

Request 3 

Request 4 

Request 5 

Human HR-employee 

11min 43 sec 

12 min 34 sec 

11 min 22 sec 

10 min 56 sec 

11 min 15 sec 

RPA-bot 

9 sec 

8 sec 

9 sec 

10 sec 

9 sec 

The task of the third bot is to generate certificates to 18 different employees of 

the company. Relevant employees will be selected and the reasons why they take the 

certificate will be provided. The input parameters for testing can be found in the Table 

14 below. 

Table 14. Requests for the third bot 

Request number 

Name of the employee 

Reason 

Request 1 

Request 2 

Request 3 

Request 4 

Request 5 

Request 6 

Request 7 

Request 8 

Request 9 

Request 10 

Request 11 

Request 12 

Request 13 

Request 14 

Request 15 

Request 16 

Request 17 

Request 18 

Устинова Валерия Денисовна 

“Хочу получить визу” 

Вишняков Леонид Вячеславович 

“Получение визы” 

Филиппова Василиса Всеволодовна 

“Беру для новой визы” 

Кириллова Александра Вениаминовна 

“Нужно для оформления документов” 

Евсеев Виктор Евдокимович 

“Хочу оформить справку для отпуска.” 

Полякова Лидия Арсениевна 

“Для съема квартиры” 

Логинов Ярополк Гуриевич 

Гордеев Зиновий Олимпиевич 

“Нужно подать документы на визу. Нужна справка о 
трудоустройстве” 
“Оформляю документы на визу” 

Якушева Евдокия Гостомысловна 

“Для съема жилья” 

Юдина Элеонора Творимировна 

“Нужно подтвердить занятость” 

Пахомов Лавр Проклович 

“Оформление визы” 

Громова Иванна Симоновна 

“Нужна справка для получения визы” 

Гришина Елизавета Егоровна 

“Нужна справка для съема квартиры в г. Москве” 

Николаева Елизавета Фотиевна 

Белоусов Ладимир Твердиславович 

Дроздов Епифан Германович 

Зыков Адам Егорович 

“Хочу оформить документы для получения визы, 
чтобы поехать в отпуск.” 
“Беру для новой визы” 

“Нужна справка для оформления визы, прошу 
сделать побыстрее” 
“Беру справку о трудоустройстве для съема жилья” 

Бобылева Вера Афанасиевна 

“Нужна справка для оформления новой визы” 

The manual creation of these references was assigned to a real HR employee and 

a comparison of the results is presented in the Table 15-17 below. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 15. Results for the third scenario 

Human HR-employee 

Request 1 
10 min 40 sec 

Request 2 
10 min 53 sec 

Request 3 
11 min 8 sec 

RPA-bot 

51 sec 

48 sec 

53 sec 

Request 4 
10 min 45 
sec 
49 sec 

Request 5 
9 min 12 sec 

50 sec 

Request 6 
11 min 47 
sec 
47 sec 

Table 16. Results for the third scenario 

Human HR-employee 

Request 7 
13 min 45 sec 

Request 8 
10 min 48 sec 

Request 9 
8 min 18 sec 

Request 10 
9 min 56 sec 

RPA-bot 

50 sec 

54 sec 

51 sec 

51 sec 

Request 11 
10 min 32 
sec 
49 sec 

Request 12 
14 min 21 
sec 
50 sec 

Table 17. Results for the third scenario 

Human HR-employee 

Request 13 
13 min 16 sec 

Request 14 
15 min 6 sec 

RPA-bot 

52 sec 

50 sec 

Request 15 
14 min 56 
sec 
48 sec 

Request 16 
11 min 54 
sec 
50 sec 

Request 17 
13 min 36 
sec 
52 sec 

Request 18 
12 min 34 
sec 
51 sec 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Conclusions 

After obtaining the performance results and measuring the execution speed for 

all  three  RPA  bots  created  during  this  work,  it  is  possible  for  us  to  formulate 

conclusions.  For  each  scenario,  we  conducted  a  series  of  tests  in  order  to  measure 

possible performance deviations for different user requests. 

8.1 Profile search 

The requests for applications were quite detailed and contained a lot of additional 

parameters. A person who searched for such profiles  manually had to spend time on 

opening  the  browser,  navigating  to  “hh.ru”,  authentication,  selecting  “search 

candidates”  menu  item,  filling  the  necessary  tags  on  the  search  form,  getting  and 

validating results, and lastly transferring the results to Excel spreadsheet and a database 

manually (field-by-field). Alternatively, our RPA-bot performs all the specified actions 

in auto-mode (for example, accesses the server directly with URL with embedded tags, 

uses XPath technology to parse the data from the web pages, and use out-of-the-box 

integration  capabilities  to  populate  data  into  Excel  spreadsheet  and  database 

simultaneously).  

Based on the performed test results we can make the following conclusions: 

•  RPA-bot reduces the execution time to complete a vacancy search request from 

~3.5 minutes to ~24 seconds per one search profile.  

•  RPA-bot will be more effective in case we need to process more vacancy search 

requests. RPA-bot works 24/7 and does not have to take a break or switch to 

another task in between.  

•  During our tests, RPA-bots did zero mistakes.  

•  RPA-bot  uploads  the  data  and  search  parameters  directly  to  the  company's 

server; an HR employee would have needed additional time to connect to the 

system  and  enter  the  data  using  the  standard  method.  More  integrated 

34 

 
informational systems the company has, the greater efficiency will be achieved 

with RPA technology. 

8.2 Calculation of salary data 

Normally,  HR  employee  does  all  the  calculations  with  the  help  of  third-party 

software, like CRM or ERP tool, MS Excel or manually. Our solution allows to increase 

the total speed and performance of calculating dynamic salaries. The key difference is 

the  time  spent  on  connecting  to  the  database  and  entering  the  necessary  values  and 

formulas into the system interface. The RPA-bot produces the final result in less than 

10 seconds; unlike the manual process, the bot only asked for the required data (year, 

month) for which the calculation has to be made. In our tests, we have demonstrated 

that  RPA  bots,  due  to  their  integration  capabilities  and  flexibility,  can  be  extremely 

effective  in  optimizing  processes  that  consist  of  uniform  and  repetitive  database 

queries.  

8.3 Employment certificate bot 

In this scenario, we managed to achieve a significant acceleration of document 

generation with no data errors. As an example, we have started the bot 18 times, and 

recorded the resulting execution time. In all the cases, the bot performed the task almost 

ten  minutes  faster  than  a  human;  whereas  a  human  needed  almost  11  minutes  to 

compose and send the document to Telegram chat to the applicant, RPA-bot handled 

this task in ~50 seconds. With large volumes, RPA-bot saves a significant amount of 

time,  it  gives  almost  16  hours  of  economy  for  every  100  documents.  It  also  gives  a 

significant financial value. 

In addition, the bot recorded a log of issued certificates: information about issued 

certificates, applicants, dates and written explanations of the reasons for the request was 

recorded in the company's database, which makes it possible to create different kind of 

reports and KPIs. 

35 

 
8.4 Common conclusions 

Concluding the results of our work, it should be noted that we managed to show 

in  practice  the  advantages  of  RPA-technology  application  for  HR  tasks  automation. 

While  working  on  this  project,  we  have  identified  the  areas  of  HR  where  RPA 

automation could significantly speed up the work processes overall. We also saw that 

using RPA technology reduces the number of errors to zero,  it solves the problem of 

integration with internal and legacy systems. In addition, RPA technology significantly 

increases the efficiency and performance due to 24/7 continuous work without holidays, 

weekends,  vacations,  and  sick  leaves.  What  is  even  more  important,  with  RPA 

technology we can free large amount of employees’ time to perform more intellectual 

and decision-making work.  

9. Further development 

Considering the future of the work we have done, we can say that it has a great 

potential  regarding  the  further  optimization  of  performance  of  HR  activities  that  we 

have discussed here. This program project has covered only a fraction of the activities 

that HR performs. Therefore, we suggest that this work has many options for further 

development, including deepening into the specific areas of HR activities and creating 

more detailed program solutions based on what we have done in this work.  

For the recruitment process, for example, we may suggest the development of a 

digital solution for a complete multi-level approval system for the onboarding process. 

In this case, we can use the bot we have developed for profile searching as a basis for 

the future RPA-project of onboarding automatization, because the search of candidates 

is always one of the first and most important steps during the process of recruiting new 

employees. This project will also involve integration with the company's BPM or ERP 

systems, as well as working with the organization's database. 

36 

 
The  future  project  may  evaluate  the  usefulness  of  robotization  for  candidate 

approval processes, forming job offers, automatic creation of new employee’s accounts 

in company’s active directory, and so on. So, there are lots of opportunities for further 

development of the project in this area. 

We can also add some ideas about applying AI technology together with RPA for 

optimizing some other HR processes. For example, we thought about extension to our 

work,  which  would  imply  the  development  of  AI  model  for  analyzing  the  parsed 

resumes  and  determining  the  most  suitable  candidates  for  the  position. This  project 

could  demonstrate  the  effectiveness  from  the  collaborative  usage  of  RPA  and AI,  as 

well  as  demonstrate  the  acceleration  of  this  business  process  execution  in  practice. 

Moreover, various machine learning and neural network techniques could be used for 

classification of the resumes collected by our bot, which could allow HR employee to 

select the appropriate types of candidates much faster, without reading through all of 

them. 

The future solution could also focus on more detailed robotization of personnel 

management functions. In our work, we have considered only one type of requests, and 

made  it  possible  to  create  them  directly  via Telegram.  In  the  future,  it  is  possible  to 

expand this part of the project and make a larger RPA-solution that could create a larger 

number of different documents, as well as make requests within the corporate portal 

and forward documents for signing. Thus, we could speed up the creation of a greater 

variety of documents and make it possible to do all these processes via the messenger. 

37 

 
 
 
 
10. Reference list 

[1]  Charles,  Cayrat. The  roles  of  the  HR  function: A  systematic  review  of  tensions, 
continuity and change  / Cayrat Charles, Boxall Peter. — text // Elsevier. — 2023. — 
Human Resource Management Review 33. 

[2] Goyal, K. Human resource management practices and employee engagement / K. 
Goyal, A. Nigam, N. Goyal. — text // International Journal of Human Capital in Urban 
Management (IJHCUM). — 2023. — 8(4). — 559-572. 

[3]  Dr.  Malla  Jogarao. Workplace Automation  and  Its  Impact  on  HR  Practices  /  Dr. 
Malla  Jogarao,  Dr.  S. T.  Naidu,  Hemalatha Tattikota.  —  text  //  JETIR.  —  2019.  — 
Volume 6, Issue 3. 

[4]  Syaiful,  A.  M.  Improving  Efficiency  and  Effectiveness  of  Robotic  Process 
Automation  in  Human  Resource  Management  /  A.  M.  Syaiful,  A.  M.  Moamin, 
Najah,Mahdi,and,Salama,A Mohammed. — text // Sustainability. — 2022. — Vol.14.  

[5]  Somayya,  Madakam.  THE  FUTURE  DIGITAL  WORK  FORCE:  ROBOTIC 
PROCESS AUTOMATION (RPA) / Madakam Somayya, M. H. Rajesh, K. J. Durgesh. 
— text // Journal of Information Systems and Technology Management – Jistem USP. 
— 2019. — Vol. 16. 

[6] Naveen, E. V. Automating HR Processes with Robotic Process Automation (RPA) / 
E. V. Naveen. — text // Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences Technology.  — 
2023. — Volume 5(1). — 1-5. 

[7] lmari, P., & Juha, L. (2021). Robotic process automation (RPA) as a digitalization 
related tool to process enhancement and time saving. 

[8] Danijel, Horvat. Risks associated with robotic process automation / Horvat Danijel, 
Gluscevic  Luka,  Ivanišević  Rajko.  —  text  //  Journal  of  Process  Management  New 
Technologies. — 2024. — Volume 12(1-2). — 72-82. 

[9]  Vijai,  C,and,Mariyappan,M,S  Robotic  Process  Automation  (RPA)  in  Human 
Resource  Functions 
//  Advances  In 
/  C,and,Mariyappan,M,S  Vijai.  — 
Management. — 2023. — Vol. 16 (3).  

text 

[10] Pix Robotics. — Текст : электронный // База Знаний Pix RPA : [URL]. — URL: 
https://docs.pixrobotics.com/articles/#!rpa/welcome. 

38 

 
 
11. Appendix 

11.1 Main Terminology and Definitions 

Main terminology, abbreviations and definitions could be found in Table 18. 

Table 18. Main terminology and abbreviations used in this work 

Terminology 

Explanation 

Robotic Process Automation (RPA) 

Robotic Process Automation (RPA) is a technology that implies 

the creation of software robots (attended or unattended, or in other 

words that work with or without human intervention respectively) 

for emulating humans’ actions of interacting with digital systems 

and software, performing repetitive and routine tasks, or 

integrating with 3rd-party systems (especially legacy). 

HR department 

HR is the organizational unit that is responsible for human 

resources management: finding, recruiting, hiring and training 

new employees for the company, as well as supporting the 

workforce and maintaining the harmony and wellbeing as an 

employee. 

RPA-bot 

RPA-bot is the script that emulates the sequence of human 

activities in the digital environment. Such bots are usually 

performing the tasks that do not require decision making, but take 

too much time and efforts from the employees. A bot can be 

attended (human’s intervention required) or unattended (works 

without constant control of a human employee). 

Repetitive, monotonous or rule-based 

Repetitive, monotonous or rule-based tasks are the tasks that 

tasks 

require no or minimum intellectual work, take lots of time, have 

repetitive nature and based on some set of rules or expressions. 

C&B (Compensations and Benefits) 

C&B is one of the core functions of the HR department, which is 

focused on the management of payrolls and benefits. 

BPM (Business Process 

BPM software is the set of tools that helps companies to manage 

Management) software 

and automate their business processes, thus increasing the speed 

and quality of how their business operates. Such software 

39 

 
 
 
normally includes tools for data management, forms and 

workflows development and execution. 

ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) 

ERP software is a set of tools that helps to optimize the day-to-

software 

day operations of core business processes, usually related to 

finance and supply chains.  

Active Directory 

Active Directory (AD) is a directory service of maintaining users 

MSSQL Server 

MSSQL is a relational database engine that uses the T-SQL 

and organizational units’ information from Microsoft. 

syntaxis for doing various operations with data. This engine is 

used for handling various systems, including transaction 

processing, business intelligence, and data analytics. 

Pix RPA 

Pix RPA is a Robotic Process Automation (RPA) platform that 

was developed by Pix Robotics (Russia). This is a low-code 

platform that allows the creation, launch and administration of 

RPA-bots.  

Telegram Messenger 

Telegram Messenger is a popular messenger application, that is 

widely used and provides instruments for creating and 

administrating chat-bots. 

11.2 Link to the implemented RPA-bots (GitHub) 

[11] Link to the GitHub: https://github.com/romakholinov/Thesis_Project_2025  

[12] Link to the web-interface for working with parsed profiles: 
https://k2demo.ru/Runtime/Runtime/Form/CandidateSearch.List/  

40 

 
 
 
