1

THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION

STATE BUDGETARY HIGHER EDUCATION UNIT

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY

«HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS»

FACULTY OF WORLD ECONOMY AND WORLD POLITICS

International Program ‘International Relations and Global Studies’

Thesis Paper

On the topic:

«The Impact of the Trump and Biden Administrations on French Defense 
Policy 2017-2025»

By the student 

of the 4th year,

group 215,

Eivind Knapskog

Academic supervisor: 

Eduard Zulfatovich Galimullin

MOSCOW 2025

 
 
 
 
 
2

Table of contents

Introduction 

- Literature review  

- Research gap  

- Research question and hypothesis  

- Methodology  

p.3

     p.5

     p.24

     p.25

     p.25

1. Brief overview of US-French military cooperation over time  

p.28

1.1 US-French Military Relations in the Cold War 

      (1945-1991)  

1.2 Post-Cold War Realignment (1991-2017)

2. The Impact of US Policy on French Defense Policy  

2.1 Presidency of Donald Trump (2017-2021)

2.2 Presidency of Joe Biden (2021-2025)  

3. Analysis of the Impact of US Policy on French Defense 

    Policy  

3.1 Defense Dilemma: US Pressures vs. French Strategic  

      Culture  

3.2 Summary of the findings  

Conclusion  

References  

Appendix  

p.28

p.29

p.33

p.33  

p.49  

p.69

p.69

p.81

p.93

p.98

p.122

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3

Introduction

The   transatlantic   relationship   has   been   a   mainstay   in   modern 

international   life,   tying   North   America   and   Europe   together   economically, 

politically   and   militarily   since   the   late   1940s.   Transatlantic   relations   were 

initially conceived as a response to contextual, historical factors, most notably 

the looming financial crisis following the destruction of the Second World 

War and the need for reconstruction of European economies, as well as the 

increasingly hostile and competitive interaction between the United States and 

the Soviet Union. The creation of NATO in 1949 was then a milestone both in 

rapprochement between the two sides of the Atlantic and in military alliance 

formation   in   general.   By   the   1990s,   there   was   a   common   perception   that 

NATO   had   become   an   outdated   and   dysfunctional   organization,   no   longer 

willing or capable of serving a clear purpose due to the demise of the USSR 

and the end of the Cold War. As late as 2019, French President Emmanuel 

Macron declared that NATO was experiencing “brain death” (Haglund, 2022). 

However,   this   view   was   proven   wrong,   as   the   organization   expanded   its 

membership and took on new tasks, some of which were no longer related to 

defense. Conflicts such as the War in Afghanistan (2001-2021), the 1995 and 

1999 interventions in the former Yugoslavia, the 2011 toppling of the Gaddafi 

regime   and,   most   recently,   the   ongoing   involvement   in   Ukraine   during 

Russia’s Special Military Operation, showcases NATO’s expanded remit.

The United States plays a key role in the alliance, as the country is the 

leading   member-state   in   terms   of   military   expenditure.   The   USA   is 

consequently   frequently   perceived   as   the   leader   of   the   alliance   and   as 

possessing an agenda-setting role. Bilateral relations of the United States with 

individual European member states are thus all the more important, and go 

beyond   the   transatlantic   framework.   Franco-American   relations   are   of 

particular significance. In addition to possessing continental Europe’s largest 

4

army,   France   is   the   oldest   ally   of   the   United   States,   having   maintained 

friendly relations with the country since the founding days of the American 

War for Independence. France was the first country to officially recognize US 

statehood,   and   Franco-American   relations   thus   have   deep   historical   roots. 

France is also frequently cited as a main engine for contemporary European 

integration, including in the realm of defense policy, affecting its engagement 

with the perennial transatlantic ally.

In   parallel   with   developments   related   to   the   European   integration 

process, the United States has shifted its indulgent approach towards NATO 

and the alliances with its transatlantic partners to a more assertive one, with 

the transition beginning under the presidency of Donald Trump. The USA 

demanded that its European allies increase their defense spending in order to 

meet an agreed upon 2 percent of GDP. Despite the different tone and style of 

the   succeeding   Biden   administration,   the   insistence   on   the   greater 

participation of other states into the common defense budget was maintained 

and further accentuated. Currently, a number of NATO countries still do not 

fulfill the essential military expenditure requirements, with France at 2.06% 

barely meeting the threshold in 2024. Recent years have nonetheless seen a 

steady increase in defense spending among NATO members, with the number 

of countries meeting the minimum requirement soaring from 4 members in 

2017 to 23 members in 2024 (with the total membership standing at 32 states 

as of 2024) (Duggal, 2024).

It is thus interesting to investigate what prompted such a change of 

pattern   in   expenditures   over   the   preceding   decade   or   so,   and   in   particular 

whether US rhetoric and foreign policy change on the matter precipitated the 

increase. In this regard, an analysis of Franco-American relations over the 

period presents itself as a meaningful case-study, taking into account not only 

the historical ties between the two nations and the current significance of the 

5

French military within the NATO framework, but also the tendency of France 

to   pursue   independent   defense   policies   and   attempt   to   foster   European   (as 

opposed   to   transatlantic)   cooperation.   These   dynamics   are   all   the   more 

relevant,   considering   the   return   of   Donald   Trump   to   the   White   House   in 

January 2025. Trump’s attitude towards the alliance during the first months of 

his   second   mandate   has   proven   even   more   confrontational   than   before, 

severely straining transatlantic ties and prompting open speculation in Europe 

on the future viability of NATO as a security framework. As a number of 

European   states   have   embarked   on   ambitious   rearmament   programs   to 

mitigate the impact of a potential departure of the USA from the alliance, 

France   has   been   forefront   in   coordinating   efforts   to   strengthen   European 

defense and rally support for Ukraine. This is observed most evidently in the 

so-called ‘coalition of the willing’ that has been spearheaded by Emmanuel 

Macron and British PM Keir Starmer (Bortoletto, 2025). Taking into account 

the degree to which the United States has become an unreliable partner to 

Europe,   the   role   assumed   by   France   has   wider   implications   for   the   whole 

continent, including Russia. Due to the relative size and strength possessed by 

France, the country will manifestly be a centerpiece of any attempt to redesign 

the European security system. Consequently, a study of US-French relations 

over a longer period of time that can highlight the primary motivations and 

directions in the countries’ defense policy would allow to achieve a better 

understanding of current issues affecting the wider region of Europe and the 

North Atlantic.

Literature review

A significant amount of scholarly attention has been devoted to various 

aspects of transatlantic exchange and partnership. Bilateral relations, including 

6

Franco-American   interactions,   have   been   studied   in   detail.   Taking   into 

account the particular relationship of the United States and France, among the 

longest-standing   bilateral   relations   between   sovereign   states   in   modern 

history, it comes as no surprise that there is a rich literature exploring various 

aspects   of   US-French   exchange   and   cooperation   in   a   variety   of   fields.   Of 

paramount   interest   to   this   research   paper   is   collaboration   in   the   military 

sphere. The historical context of the Cold War had a major impact, and thus 

US-French interactions within NATO structures have been a focal point of 

earlier studies.

France’s   outlook   on   NATO   has   been   marked   by   the   decision   of 

President   Charles   de   Gaulle   to   withdraw   the   country   entirely   from   the 

integrated command structure of the organization in 1966. France only fully 

returned to NATO structures in 2009 under Nicolas Sarkozy’s presidency. 

Consequently,   a   number   of   studies   analyze   relations   during   this   unusual 

period of ‘incomplete’ membership. Falk Ostermann (2018) examines how the 

construction of French national identity  evolved within the organization and 

the   boundaries   set   by   the   transatlantic   partnership   in   general.   The   author 

highlights   how   interactions   between   the   European   Union,   NATO   and 

Franco-American bilateral bonds combined to form a new French approach to 

security   policy.   The   French   foreign   policy   identity   was   described   using 

Interpretive   Policy   Analysis   and   discourse   theory   from   the   Essex   School. 

Above all, it can be shown that France in the 2000s progressively rejected the 

alternatives presented by increasingly deeper cooperation within the EU to the 

benefit of reintegration with NATO, which was achieved towards the end of 

the   decade.   Chirac’s   unsuccessful   attempt   to   accomplish   the   same   in   the 

1990s, as well as the major impact of the intervention in Libya in 2011 are 

also considered for a holistic understanding of the evolution of France-NATO 

relations. Overall, France de-unionized and atlanticized its defense policy in 

7

the new millennium, becoming increasingly reliant on the United States for 

efficient foreign policy implementation. 

Such patterns of change are similarly studied by Bozo and Parmentier 

(2019), but the scope of the research is narrower, focusing on a key period of 

the   early   2000s,   during   which   Franco-American   relations   appeared   to 

deteriorate under the tensions caused by the US invasion of Iraq in 2003. The 

unprecedented move by the United States was widely condemned in France, 

severely   straining   cooperation.   Nonetheless,   the   authors   underscore   that 

bilateral   relations   saw   some   improvement   in   2004,   and   that   it   has   been 

characterized   by   a   “businesslike”   spirit   and   pragmatic   approach   from   both 

sides   since   then.   The   two   countries   are   complementary   partners   when 

common   interests   are   identified   and   notions   of   national   grandeur   are 

abandoned in favor of concrete objectives.

In   a   study   by   Pannier   (2017),   the   idea   of   French   “exceptionalism” 

which permeates the French political elite is also foregrounded as a significant 

element underpinning policy choices in the realm of defense and armament. 

Similar to Ostermann (2018), Pannier underscores the historical sources of the 

French identity, rooted in the political philosophy of De Gaulle. His study 

traces the evolution of French defense policy as seen in contrast with that of 

the   United   States   and   Great   Britain.   While   the   three   Allies   engaged   in 

close-knit cooperation during the Second World War and at the onset of the 

Cold War, the relation quickly soured under the influence of the autonomous 

stance   adopted   by   De   Gaulle   in   the   1960s,   as   well   as   the   failed   French 

participation in the Second Arab-Israeli war of 1956. The UK had for long 

been the ‘significant other’ of France in terms of identity-building and thus the 

disruption   was   of   lesser   significance,   but   US-French   partnership   suffered 

notably   during   this   period.   Nonetheless,   harmonization   occurred   after   the 

collapse of the USSR. The author examines policy adjustments in three areas: 

8

discourses, institutional commitments and modes of action, and shows that 

there   has   been   a   noteworthy   realignment   between   France   and   the 

Anglo-Saxon partners in the sphere of common defense.

Other   scholars   have   also   studied   transatlantic   relations   in   a   broader 

specter, including France in a larger group of states. For instance, Knutsen 

(2022)   takes   an   interest   in   the   US-EU   interplay   which,   considering   the 

preponderant   role   taken   on   by   the   former   in   NATO,   can   partially   be 

substituted   with   a   NATO-EU   conceptualization.   He   employs   a 

neo-functionalist methodology so as to question the implications of a more 

fragmented transatlantic cooperation for the European system of defense and 

international   security.   It   is   argued   that   efforts   to   strengthen   European 

autonomy in the defense sector in later years can be seen as a consequence of 

lessened American reliability less consistent diplomatic efforts on the part of 

the   United   States.   Nonetheless,   the   author   cautions   against   disregarding 

transatlantic relations as a relic of the past, pointing out that the diverging 

policy preferences of the EU member states in terms of defense spending and 

trajectory   signify   that   close   cooperation   between   NATO   and   any 

European-wide   defense   projects   will   be   required.   While   so   doing,   the 

European   Union   also   faces   troubling   questions   about   its   own   identity,   as 

adopting   a   more   active,   decisively   pro-European   position   in   the   now 

multipolar   state   system   might   signal   an   abandonment   of   the   multilateral 

principles that has underpinned its work for decades.

The   importance   of   international   organizations   in   framing   bilateral 

relations are also present in the work of Pruchnicka (2022), who investigated 

France’s   foreign   policy   approach   to   the   United   States   during   Emmanuel 

Macron’s   first   presidential   term.   She   understands   the   memberships   in   the 

United   Nations   and   NATO   to   be   the   most   decisive   in   shaping   bilateral 

relations between France and the United States. The notion of power status is 

9

also a substantial factor that helps elucidate France’s behavior vis-a-vis its ally 

across the Atlantic. The power asymmetry between the two countries, given 

that the USA retained its superpower status after the Cold War, while France 

following decolonization in the 1950s-1960s in some sense lost its former 

prestige   as   a   great   power,   has   prompted   a   commonplace   feeling   of 

‘anti-Americanism’   among   the   French   political   establishment.   The   French 

outlook on the United States can therefore be characterized as simultaneous 

“friendship   and   hatred”.   The   countries   do,   however,   share   some   common 

features in their thinking about the role of great powers in the international 

system. As such, both the USA and France considered a potential arrangement 

involving UN peacekeepers in Ukraine with skepticism at the onset of the 

Special Military Operation in 2022, as both Biden and Macron demonstrated a 

desire for power politics and felt entitled to play a key role in any settlement 

process.   The   opportunities   and   challenges   presented   by   changes   in 

government in 2017, with Emmanuel Macron and Donald Trump acceding to 

the presidential office in January and May, respectively, were also highlighted 

by Belin (2018). In his view, the French approach to international affairs is 

essentially based on realism, and the affinity displayed by Trump and Macron 

during   their   early   meetings   can   be   interpreted   as   the   result   of   more 

pragmatically aligned foreign policies of the two countries. In this regard, a 

lessened   focus   on   idealistic   politics   and   interventionism   was   seen   as   a 

welcome shift in Paris. Belin furthermore points out that the election year 

represented a historical high in US-French relations in the defense sphere, as 

there had been extensive coordination of defense policies over the previous 

ten   years   or   so,   mostly   centered   on   counterterrorist   action   and   shared 

operations   in   Middle   Eastern   and   African   theatres.   Notwithstanding   the 

synergy and apparent mutual understanding between the newly elected heads 

of state, the author casts doubts on the perspectives for improved and ever 

closer   partnership,   suggesting   that   Trump’s   unilateralist   instincts   and 

10

disregard   for   multilateral   institutions   might   sap   any   potential   transatlantic 

concord.

The impact of the changes introduced by the Trump administration, as 

well as the level of disruption and continuity between the Trump and Biden 

administrations, have also come under the scrutiny of academics. Kaufman 

(2017) undertook an analysis of the transatlantic relationship’s evolution from 

a historical perspective, seeking to extract lessons from the past that can assist 

in predicting future developments, in particular in the light of the election of 

Donald Trump in 2016. The modifications in policy course that the Trump 

administration would bring were described as unpredictive and incoherent, 

with statements made by Trump-appointed officials and by the president-elect 

himself   contradicting   each   other.   The   long-standing   skepticism   to 

multilateralism displayed by Trump, for instance in his description of NATO 

as   an   “obsolete”   entity,   as   well   as   his   declared   intention   of   placing   US 

national interests forefront, warrant some speculations about deatlanticization 

and a more marked turn among European allies towards the EU as a collective 

security   guarantor.   However,   the   author   also   underlined   that   the   approach 

adopted towards a resurgent Russia will exert a significant influence on any 

adjustments in transatlantic relations. Goldgeier (2019) adopts a similar point 

of   view,   expressing   reservations   about   the   sense   of   obligation   linking   the 

United States to its European allies under Donald Trump’s presidency. The 

author acknowledges the extent and clout of the deep state acting as a barrier 

containing the isolationist policies of Trump. The favorable public opinion on 

NATO in the USA as well as traditional backing by the Congress are other 

factors   that   limiting   presidential   idiosyncrasies.   The   article   nonetheless 

concludes that the latter two instances may be oscillating under pressure from 

new   political   movements   and   developments   that   were   ushered   in   by   the 

Republican electoral victory of 2016. Most notably, previously broad political 

11

endorsement   of   a   continued   American   presence   in   NATO   seems   to   be 

reorganizing   around   partisan   lines   under   the   influence   of   Trump’s   harshly 

negative   discourse   on   the   topic,   with   the   Democrat   party   appearing 

increasingly lone in their continued championing of the organization.

Similar issues are explored by Sperling and Webber (2019), who note 

Trump’s verbal onslaught on the multilateralism that has formed the backbone 

of the global order since 1945. Unlike Goldgeier, however, the authors argue 

that the transatlantic relationship is still sound and unlikely to undergo drastic 

modification in the nearest future. Two years into the Trump administration, 

they highlight the success of the organization in withstanding the uncertainty 

caused   by   the   changes   in   official   rhetoric.   They   attribute   the   discontent 

exhibited by the Republican government to a strategy of direct criticism aimed 

at obtaining leverage within intergovernmental organizations. This approach 

has been observed for some years, and in that regard Trump does not represent 

a   game-changing   turn   in   US   politics.   A   complete   withdrawal   from   the 

transatlantic framework is perceived as unlikely by the authors, considering 

the endurance of the alliance as well as a lack of practical feasibility. This 

perspective is also expressed by Schreer (2019), who argues that the security 

complex formed between North America and Europe is a quasi-permanent 

factor   in   contemporary   international   relations.   There   is   consequently   little 

room for any significant rearrangement of the security order, which is marked 

by   the   overwhelmingly   predominant   position   occupied   by   NATO,   with 

supplementary tasks performed by the European Union in its missions abroad 

as part of the Common Security and Defense Policy (CSDP). The paper also 

casts doubts on the capacity of the European Union to boost its own strategic 

autonomy   through   increased   investments   in   the   CSDP   and   reduced 

dependence on NATO for military purposes. The European NATO members 

are mostly content with preserving the status quo of transatlantic cooperation, 

12

and the new US administration is uncapable of structurally undermining it to 

any meaningful degree.

In a retrospective study, Schuette (2021) maintains the key points stated 

by previous papers, related to the longevity of the North Atlantic partnership. 

It is clear that NATO as an organization withstood the troubled presidency of 

Donald Trump, who neither succeeded in divorcing the United States from it, 

nor managed to scale down the responsibilities and commitments of the USA 

inside it. The continued subsistence of the alliance over the four disconcerting 

years can be attributed to a number of factors, including the ability of the State 

Secretary   bureaucracy   in   undermining   and   distorting   the   White   House’s 

policies,   the   power   of   a   deeply   liberal   American   public,   and   the   backlash 

surrounding   the   President’s   personality   and   outlandish   mannerisms.   The 

single most important element in NATO’s success, however, was the effective 

governance of the organization. Schuette conducted interviews with a number 

of high-ranking representatives of the defense alliance and concluded that the 

Secretary   General   was   central   to   the   united   front   displayed   by   the   other 

member   states,   aptly   fending   off   and   disarming   Trump’s   unilateralist 

inclinations.   In   the   author’s   view,   Secretary   General   Stoltenberg   engaged 

Trump diplomatically and sustained a positive relationship with him, partially 

placating   his   demands   for   increased   expenditures   by   the   other   member 

countries.   Schuessler   and   Shifrinson   (2019)   are   also   confident   that   the 

transatlantic partnership will continue to be a mainstay in American foreign 

policy, but adopt an entirely different point of view. The authors criticize the 

perception   of   Donald   Trump   as   an   outlier   in   the   succession   of   US 

administrations   since   1949,   and   claim   that   the   caprices   and   anchoring 

strategies used by Trump are not unique in the history of the organization. 

Indeed, previous administrations have also had recourse to menaces, such as 

those of pulling out of the partnership, as an instrument for the furtherance of 

13

American foreign policy goals. Such stratagems were particularly prevalent in 

the early history of the Treaty, when the United States seriously considered 

withdrawing its forces stationed in Europe since the end of World War II, and 

resurfaced in later stages of the Cold War, as a response to the ever closer 

cooperation between France and Germany. In other words, US alliances have 

not   been   characterized   only   by   confidence   building   among   formally   equal 

partners, but have seen the United States maneuvering deftly so as to retain its 

central   position   in   the   alliance   network.   Consequently,   in   the   view   of   the 

authors,   Trump’s   presidency   is   unlikely   to   permanently   undermine   the 

cooperation between the United States and its European allies.

Points of convergence and divergence between the Trump and Biden 

administrations   are   explored   by   Singh   (2024),   who   defines   the   contrasting 

foreign policies of the latest two US Presidents as “doctrines”, a term in line 

with the  naming tradition established during the Cold War and continued in 

the   21st   century   with   the   ‘Bush   doctrine’.   The   Biden   administration’s 

approach   to   foreign   policy   was   from   the   onset   marked   by   the   desire   to 

distance itself from that of Donald Trump and signify a return to the bipartisan 

internationalist   tradition   established   by   earlier   administrations.   The   author, 

however,   questions   the   extent   to   which   Biden   succeeded   in   renewing   US 

commitment to its allies and a global rules-based order defined by active and 

unwavering   participation   in   international   forums   and   institutions,   such   as 

NATO.   First,   a   series   of   foreign   policy   misfortunes,   most   notably   the 

calamitous retreat from Afghanistan in 2021, sapped trust in the US ability to 

prevail globally. Second, the vagueness of Biden’s strategy, being variously 

classified with epithets such as “Rooseveltian internationalism”, “belligerent 

nationalism” and even “pragmatic realism”, fostered uncertainty among allies. 

Third,   the   points   of   continuity   with   the   Trump   administration   undermined 

Biden’s self-constructed image as an ‘anti-Trump’. The author concludes that 

14

Biden leaves behind a legacy of mixed accomplishments. In an article that 

serves as an introduction to a lengthier journal special edition on the Biden 

administration and the challenges and opportunities it faces, Dimitrova (2022) 

similarly underlines the efforts made by Biden to resuscitate the transatlantic 

partnership after the alleged damage caused by Donald Trump’s four years in 

power.   In   many   ways   the   Democratic   Party’s   return   to   the   White   House 

generated   enthusiasm   in   Europe,   with   expectations   that   US   foreign   policy 

towards its allies would become more predictable hereafter. Whereas other 

scholars   showed   to   the   resilience   of   NATO   during   Trump’s   presidency, 

Dimitrova   underscores   that   his   mandate   in   general   terms   represented   an 

all-time low in the transatlantic relationship, due to a focus on internal policy 

issues marked by slogans such as “America First” and “Make America Great 

Again” (MAGA). Collective security and multilateralism were never a great 

concern   for   the   Republicans,   at   least   not   for   the   Trumpist   faction   that 

dominated party politics in 2017-2021. 

Some   of   these   reflections   are   echoed   in   Sheng   (2023),   though   he 

broadens the scope of Trumpian policies that could be considered calamitous 

for the transatlantic partnership. Beyond the general onslaught on multilateral 

institutions,   Trump   employed   a   dismissive   rhetoric   vis-a-vis   the   EU 

specifically, raising doubts about the future of trade and economic agreements 

between the two sides of the Atlantic. Additional factors that contributed to 

the   plummeting   of   relations   was   the   incoherent   response   of   the   Trump 

administration   to   the   COVID-19   pandemic,   as   well   as   a   pivot   from   the 

Atlantic basin to the Indo-Pacific, epitomized by the American trade war with 

China. The inauguration of Joe Biden in January 2021 reversed this trend, 

though   the   approach   of   the   new   administration   is   largely   one   of 

instrumentality.   The   author   gives   much   attention   to   the   emergence   of 

competing poles in the international system and the rise of China in particular. 

15

In his view, transatlantic relations can be mobilized as a tool so as to prop up 

the American strategy of containment of its two principal adversaries, China 

and the Russian federation. However, this scheme faces some difficulties in 

the   political   fragmentation   of   Europe,   as   European   states   have   differing 

preferences regarding their relations with both Russia and China. For instance, 

several   southern   European   state   have   engaged   China   or   expressed   a 

willingness to take part in the Belt and Road Initiative. Another hurdle that 

complicates the matter is the US attempt to increase the presence of NATO in 

the   Indo-Pacific   and   South   China   Sea   with   a   view   to   deter   Chinese 

expansionism in the region. This poses a dilemma for many member states 

who are also part of the European Union, which cultivates close commercial 

ties with the People’s Republic of China.

Besides the escalating tensions and great power competition between 

China and the United States, much attention has been devoted to the standoff 

between the USA and Russia during Biden’s presidency, and the implications 

for the former’s role in the transatlantic alliance. Thus, according to Dolan 

(2023),   the   American   involvement   in   the   conflict   in   Ukraine   from   2022 

onwards has exerted a defining influence on the way in which the United 

States   understands   its   position   and   responsibilities   within   the   organization. 

The effect has been ambiguous and has evolved in unexpected directions since 

the beginning of the Special Military Operation. The author notes the rising 

popularity of dissenting voices in domestic US politics, who question the need 

for an American obligation to uphold European security. These unprecedented 

reservations about the validity of a continued NATO cooperation can be seen 

in parallel with an emerging awareness of China as the United States’ primary 

rival on the world stage. Party dynamics and the desire for Republicans and 

Democrats to distance themselves from each other have also been a prominent 

factor underlying the drift away from Europe. This perspective is shared by 

16

McNamara   (2022),   who   underscores   the   challenges   that   a   changed 

geopolitical reality imposes on the formation of alliances between the USA 

and smaller countries. In that regard, the evolution of the conflict in Ukraine 

highlights some essential features of US alliance building and their (potential 

lack of) sustainability. Many smaller states around the globe are confronted 

with the choice between promoting ties with the United States and managing 

relations with neighboring revisionist powers that are eager to carve out a 

more   distinguished   place   for   themselves   in   the   international   system.   The 

author predicts that the American leadership, despite a period of more inward 

focus   under   Donald   Trump,   will   probably   continue   to   cultivate   a   set   of 

informal alliances and partnerships with a varied selection of countries, as it 

sees fit. Less emphasis will be placed on formal alliances, such as NATO.

The differences and similarities between the presidencies of Trump and 

Biden were also explored by Bag, Roy, & Shah (2024), who used a ‘national 

role conception theory’ in order to clarify the degree of variation in policies 

related   to   foreign   relations   and   security   matters.   They   take   interest   in   the 

cognition of the head of state and interrogate to what extent the way in which 

the two leaders conceptualized the position, duties and part to be played by the 

USA impacted on the way they construed their alliances, and in particular on 

cooperation within the NATO framework. The team of researchers found that 

while there were mostly dissimilarities between the perceptions of Trump and 

Biden, there was an important share of correspondence, which can explain the 

presence of overlapping policy visions. Their highly contrasting handlings of 

NATO   are   also   partly   accounted   for   by   the   differences   in   national   role 

perception. Miskimmon et al. (2023), on the other hand, employed the concept 

of ‘strategic narratives’ to reconcile the fields of Foreign Policy Analysis and 

mainstream   International   Relations   theory.   This   approach   highlights   how 

specific policies are being legitimized, both to the domestic public and to the 

17

outside   world.   Again,   the   notion   of   national   identity   is   central   to   any 

understanding of the decision-making process. The author found that Trump’s 

rhetoric represented a rupture in US foreign policy tradition, as it was mostly 

employing a commercial language with philosophical underpinnings situated 

in the tradition of mercantilism. The Trumpist vision was directly at odds with 

the narrative that predominated in the European NATO members, which was 

rooted   in   a   shared   tradition   of   compromise   and   coaction,   and   implicitly 

understood   the   existence   of   NATO   and   other   multilateral   forums   as 

normatively   desirable.   The   paper   predicts   that   the   aftershocks   of   Trump’s 

mandate will last some time, but that any subsequent US administrations can 

benefit   from   returning   to   a   common,   transatlantic   narrative   centered   on 

democratic government, liberalism and shared cultural values.

There is also a dense body of academic work on French defense and 

security   outlooks.   Frequent   topics   that   come   up   in   relation   to   French 

strategy-making in recent years include the relationship of the country with 

other states (above all the United States, Germany and Russia), the impact of 

terrorism and Brexit on French policy orientations, as well as the ambiguous 

role   played   by   France   in   balancing   NATO   with   a   prospective   integrated 

European defense project.

Pannier   and   Schmitt   (2019)   provide   an   overview   on   French   defense 

outlooks in the 2010s. They note that French policy-making has undergone 

considerable changes over the last decade in terms of how it reflects on the 

use of military force. As a result of reduced economic means and a changed 

landscape of threats, French defense policy has contracted so as to concentrate 

on a smaller portfolio of tasks. In particular, terrorism emerged as a significant 

menace to national security half-way through the decade, contributing to the 

prioritization of combat operations in the Sahel and in the Middle East (Syria). 

With the rise of competing great powers, typically identified as Russia, Iran or 

18

China, but sometimes including Erdogan’s Turkey in the list, the limits of the 

French military have become more apparent, and with it the need to engage 

allies   in   collective   structures.   In   this   sense,   French   policy   has   become 

increasingly realist in nature. At the same time, there is continuity with the 

past, as France perpetuates an old aim of projecting itself as an active player 

in   the   international   system,   capable   of   projecting   power   way   beyond   the 

confines of its territory (Pannier & Schmitt, 2019). An important aspect of 

French   defense   policy   is   necessarily   its   somewhat   troubled   relations   with 

NATO, of which it is a founding member, but whose integrated command 

structure it opted to remain outside of for an extended period of time. The 

relation   is   outlined   by   Grand   (2024)   in   a   paper   that   takes   a   retrospective 

glance   on   seventy-five   years   of   French   NATO   membership.   Common 

misperceptions about France’s position within the organization are that the 

country is vehemently opposed to the alliance, or on the contrary, that it acts 

like a puppet deprived of autonomy. In reality, the French political elite have 

long attempted to find an equilibrium between these to extremes. Still, the 

French trajectory within the North Atlantic format is unique for at least two 

reasons. First, the country takes great concern with perpetuating its influence 

in former colonies and protectorates, especially in West Africa and the Greater 

Middle East. Second, France is one of only three member states of NATO (the 

other two being the United States and Turkey) to have developed its military 

essentially in an autonomous fashion, founded on domestic incentives. These 

features set it apart among other European countries, which pursue a more 

customary, ‘Atlanticist’ defense policy.

A considerable amount of research has been dedicated to the prospects 

of   a   common   European   defense   system   or   organization,   and   the   potential 

position that France would occupy in this novel entity. As noted by Guseinov 

(2020), France has in recent years, under the leadership of Emmanuel Macron, 

19

become a champion of a common European defense, usually understood to 

evolve within the already existing EU framework, the Common Security and 

Defense Policy (CSDP). At its current state, the military and security sphere is 

the least integrated of all European Union policy areas. Guseinov studied the 

motivating incentives that help explain the shift in French policy-making, as 

France now appears as the foremost promoter of European integration. As 

argued by the author, the political ideology espoused by Macron is akin to a 

“flexible Gaullism”, assuming the heritage of the first President of the Fifth 

Republic. The principle concretization of Macron’s outward-looking policies 

has been the Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO), in which French 

collaboration with Germany has so far been paramount to furthering the cause 

of European military integration. Staunton (2022) expands upon these themes, 

and studied how Macron conceptualizes his Europeanizing mission through 

the prism of civilization. Through a comparison of over two hundred pieces of 

discourse made by Macron over the course of his first presidential mandate, 

Staunton   foregrounds   how   Macron   perceives   France   as   having   a   historic 

mission   to   defend   both   the   liberal   international   order   and   European 

civilization   as   a   distinct   entity   within   this   global   order.   The   conclusion   is 

remarkable,   considering   that   the   two   notions   at   first   glance   appear 

contradictory. It also shows the commitment of France, as a middle power or 

lesser great power, to international organizations and multilateral solutions. 

Maślanka (2023) takes on a more negative view of Macron’s maneuvering on 

the international arena, arguing that by distancing himself from NATO and the 

partnership with the United States, the French President is effectively weaking 

the degree of trust his country so far has enjoyed, both globally and among 

other allies. Despite vowing support for the Ukrainian war effort since 2022, 

the Macronian project of a united Europe that is more autonomous from the 

USA has been advocated for through the use of terms such as ‘balance of 

power’, ‘sphere of influence’ and a framing of European civilization that is 

20

reminiscent of the notion of multipolarity. This, in the opinion of the author, 

has   brought   France   ideologically   closer   to   more   authoritarian   states   that 

construct their identity and role by relying on similar notions. The French 

stated desire of attaining more independence from the United States, both for 

itself   and   for   its   European   neighbors,   is   also   noted   by   Tekir   (2021),   who 

reconnects the debate to the uncertainties surrounding the continued validity 

of NATO. The progressive decoupling between North America and Europe 

observed in the late 2010s are to be attributed to two parallel developments: 

the radical turn in American foreign policy under Donald Trump, as well as 

the rise of a more assertive European Union, increasingly acting more as a 

whole than as a sum of its components. Illustrations of the latter include the 

aforementioned PESCO, but also the EI2 (European Intervention Initiative), 

which is not attached to an EU organ, but functions independently. The EI2 

was first proposed by Macron, and is headquartered in Paris. Notwithstanding 

the limited scope of these projects compared to NATO, they symbolize the 

European   effort   to   achieve   greater   autonomy   that   is   being   spearheaded   by 

France. Macron has so far been reasonably successful in fusioning France’s 

foreign   policy   objectives   with   those   of   the   wider   region.   Some   scholars 

nonetheless   comment   on   the   lack   of   unity   that   beleaguers   attempts   at 

integrating   the   European   continent   into   a   common   and   coherent   defense 

system. Like Guseinov, Wasson (2024) points out the Gaullist tradition that 

permeates French endeavors to realign collective security agreements away 

from the United States. The concept of Europe puissance, first advanced by 

De Gaulle, is central to France’s European policy - the idea that European 

nations together can form a common army that will enable the continent to 

compete with great powers such as the United States, Russia, and now China. 

Two major stumbling blocks for the European project, however, have been the 

decision   of   the   UK   to   leave   the   EU   in   2016,   as   well   as   less   cordial 

French-German bilateral relations. In effect, the French strife for European 

21

leadership has been poorly received by the German political establishment, 

both under Merkel and Scholtz.

Brexit is in the academic literature commonly perceived as a starting 

point for renewed European integration initiatives, for instance in Koenig and 

Walter-Franke   (2017).   More   importantly,   though,   the   degree   of   synergy 

between France and Germany in promoting or hindering European integration 

in   the   defense   sphere   has   received   much   scholarly   attention   since   the 

downsizing of the Union in 2016. Thus, Koenig and Walter-Franke argue that 

both   countries   have   invested   themselves   in   the   CSDP   since   the   UK’s 

withdrawal, but question the extent to which the two partners will manage to 

find common ground in the concrete policies to be implemented, and whether 

the Franco-German tandem in itself is adequate to serve as a locomotive for 

reform   in   the   EU.   Kempin   (2021)   underscores   the   gap   that   separates   the 

French and German visions of the Common Security and Defense Policy. In 

light   of   a   diminished   American   presence   and   attentiveness   to   European 

security,   France   is   eager   to   replace   the   United   States   as   a   guarantor   of 

continental   peace   and   stability.   Despite   such   ambitious   aims,   the   French 

government under Emmanuel Macron has come to the realization that it does 

not possess the necessary capabilities by itself, and has turned to its German 

neighbor   in   the   hopes   of   attracting   German   funds   and   clout.   Germany, 

however, has so far been reticent to French blueprints for tighter cooperation, 

preferring   to   balance   its   commitments   to   the   EU   and   NATO   instead. 

Billon-Galland   and   Quencez   (2017)   view   the   integration   process   less 

despondently, maintaining that while there may be significant divergence in 

the French and German outlooks on security and the strategy to pursue for a 

common European military in the long term, convergence between the two 

states is possible in a shorter to medium term. Crucially, it will depend on the 

willingness of French and German governments to overcome differences that 

22

relate to the specific adoption and implementation of policies. These include 

disagreements of technical nature, such as what sort of projects to promote 

within   the   Permanent   Structured   Cooperation.   The   Franco-German 

disharmony   of   opinion   is   also   studied   by   Rynning   (2017)   in   a   longer 

perspective. He contends that the sources of differing perspectives on NATO 

can be traced to the Harmel Report of 1967, during the production of which 

the French and German distinct attitudes to the political component of NATO 

appeared.   While   France   was   initially   skeptical   of   an   enhanced   political 

dimension for NATO, West Germany adopted a more nuanced stance. This 

split is still present in contemporary attempts to reconcile integration within 

the   EU   framework,   which   for   long   has   been   driven   by   a   fundamentally 

economic logic, with integration through NATO, which has a military and 

security rationale. 

Finally,   a   subset   of   academic   papers   focus   on   developments   in 

Franco-Russian relations over the past decade so as to elucidate changes in 

French   defense   postures.   Belgacem   (2021)   contends   that   French   foreign 

policy has become more realist with the return of Russia as a great power 

capable   of   fashioning   the   European   international   security   system   to   its 

advantage. Emmanuel Macron’s dismissive declarations about NATO can be 

seen in connection with his venture at engaging Russia’s President Vladimir 

Putin in the late 2010s and early 2020s. It could be argued that Russia’s rise 

since   the   2014   reunification   of   Crimea   with   the   mainland   and   successful 

Russian   interventions   in   the   Middle   East   and   Sahel   have   had   a   disruptive 

effect on French attitudes to NATO, with the political elite now exploring 

viable   alternatives.   Attempts   at   rapprochement   stalled,   however,   after   the 

2022 escalation of the Ukrainian conflict. Welc (2023) remarks that the events 

of 2022 forced significant shifts in French foreign policy alignments, often to 

the   benefit   of   France.   The   importance   of   France   in   NATO   and   to   the 

23

Americans was considered to have risen as a result of the latter’s commitment 

to   supply   the   Ukrainians   with   equipment   and   weaponry.   Of   greater 

consequence,   however,   is   the   traction   gained   by   the   common   European 

defense   project,   of   which   Macron   has   been   a   staunch   supporter   for   years. 

France adopted, in the initial phase of the conflict, a less bellicose approach 

than other European states, and have actively developed ties with other actors 

in   the   international   system   with   a   more   neutral   position,   most   notably   the 

countries in the Persian Gulf. Lastly, the devastation of the German economy 

that   has   resulted   from   the   Ukrainian   crisis   and   the   German   leadership’s 

decision to reorient energy supplies away from Russia, can also be seen to 

France’s advantage, as it has consolidated the relative position of the latter in 

the European Union. France thus appears progressively more self-assertive 

and   outspoken   against   this   backdrop   of   German   weakness.   Another,   and 

somewhat unexpected foreign policy development since 2022 has been the 

confluence between France and Central European states such as Poland and 

the   Czech   Republic,   as   indicated   by   Cadier   (2024).   Central   and   Eastern 

Europe have conventionally been poles apart from France in debates of the 

shared European security system, with the former placing strong emphasis on 

an American presence in Europe and displaying limited interest in a purely 

European defense solution. However, as a result of the uncertainties brought 

by the conflict in Ukraine, Cadier argues there has been a slight softening in 

the   position   of   Central   European   countries   towards   the   prospect   of   an 

integrated European military.

A few general remarks can be derived from the literature review above. 

First, the academic literature on Joseph Biden’s presidency is less developed 

than that on Donald Trump’s first period, which is reasonable, considering 

that Biden quite recently ended his mandate and studies are often years in the 

making. Second, there is a dense literature on US policies towards NATO 

24

(and   to   some   extent   the   EU),   but   not   so   much   has   been   written   about 

American policies towards specific member states of NATO and/or the EU. 

Third, academic research on US-French relations in the defense sector mostly 

focus on NATO and mostly carries a historical perspective - they are often 

centered   on   the   origins   of   the   organization   and   the   impact   of   Charles   de 

Gaulle, with some articles exploring more recent governments, such as the 

Chirac, Sarkozy and Hollande presidencies seen in relation to the Bush and 

Obama   administrations.   There   is,   however,   little   scholarship   on   the   most 

recent presidencies, that is, on interactions between Macron on the one hand, 

and   Trump   and   Biden   on   the   other.   And   fourth,   recent   studies   on   French 

defense   and   security   policy   is   overwhelmingly   concerned   with   the   French 

push for a shared and integrated European defense structure.

Research gap

Thus, while a number of articles and works discuss the evolution of 

Franco-American   relations,   French   policy   towards   NATO   and   changes 

brought by the Trump and Biden administrations to transatlantic cooperation, 

no   one   study   attempted   to   comprehensively   examine   the   influence   of   US 

foreign policy on French defense policy during the leadership of Emmanuel 

Macron. There is thus a clear research gap to be explored, which is best done 

through a neoclassical realist prism, allowing to consider both external and 

domestic   factors   that   affect   the   policy-making   process.   This   topic   should 

consequently be covered in detail so as to fill the existing gap in the academic 

literature. Over the course of this research paper, I will attempt to elucidate 

the possible linkages between US and French policies, and draw lessons for 

future   developments   in   the   area.   The   topic   is   all   the   more   relevant   as   the 

changes initiated by Trump in 2017 have acquired renewed significance with 

the re-election of the latter to the US presidency in late 2024.

25

Research question and hypothesis

The   research   question   will   be   the   following:   How   did   US   policy, 

including   towards   NATO,   under   Trump   and   Biden   affect   French   defense 

policy in 2017-2025? French defense policy takes on multiple dimensions: its 

commitment to NATO budget requirements and its positioning within NATO 

structures, but also its role in promoting European alternatives to NATO such 

as the Permanent Structured Cooperation, as well as its claimed status as a 

military great power and independent actor in world affairs. A preliminary 

hypothesis could be that the inconsistent tone of the last two US presidential 

administrations interacted with domestic political factors in France to produce 

equivalent variations in French policy, giving stimuli both to continued close 

cooperation and coordination with the American partner, such as within the 

existing   framework   of   NATO,   and   to   the   pursuit   of   a   more   independent 

defense   policy   that   promotes   the   development   of   joint   European   defense 

projects.

Methodology  

This research paper will be a case-study. As such, it will have a rather 

narrow   focus   on   bilateral   Franco-American   relations,   though   any   findings 

could   have   wider   implications   for   other   NATO   members   as   well.   The 

examined period is 2017-2025, corresponding both to the ongoing presidency 

of   Emmanuel   Macron,   and   to   the   entire   duration   of   the   first   Trump 

administration and the Biden administration.

The study is inscribed into a neoclassical realist framework. A realist 

approach   is   appropriate   to   highlight   security   considerations   and   power 

26

calculations made by the concerned actors, especially taking into account the 

topic of the paper, as defense policy and changes in the balance of military 

power is a highly securitized area of international affairs. This is all the more 

true as regards the Trump administration, which not only in practice, but also 

in rhetoric marked a step away from conventional American discourse, which 

tends to be infused with liberal viewpoints, towards a neorealist perspective.

However, a neorealist framework would not be sufficient to elucidate 

fluctuations in French policy-making, neither in the long term of post-war 

relations,   nor   in   the   more   compressed   time   frame   of   this   paper.   In   effect, 

France’s foreign policy has been governed by two contradictory traditions - 

one Atlanticist, seeking tight cooperation and alliance with the United States, 

the other more independent, pursuing the objective of strategic autonomy. In 

realist   parlance,   France   has   responded   to   US   superpower   status   both   by 

bandwagoning and by soft-balancing, varying its approach as it saw fit. At 

times France sees itself as subordinate to the United States, at other times as 

coordinate to the USA. 

Therefore,   a   theoretical   framework   grounded   in   neoclassical   realism 

would be better fit for this topic. Neoclassical realism interprets foreign policy 

as the product of a broader set of factors. In addition to the structure of the 

international   system,   aspects   of   domestic   politics,   such   as   public   opinion, 

perception of national identity, and the contribution of specific leaders are 

incorporated   (Rose,   1998).   Consequently,   this   research   paper   will   employ 

neoclassical   realism   in   order   to   cover   not   only   the   systemic   pressures 

represented by the United States and the power differential between the two 

countries, but also the domestic factors internal to France that allow to clarify 

the variation observed in French strategic posturing. 

27

This paper will mainly rely on the methods of comparative historical 

research,   process   tracing   and   the   narrative   method   to   research   the   chosen 

topic. Comparative historical research builds on the study of historical events 

to expound modifications in political processes. It allows to identify crucial 

factors and root causes that account for the observed changes, and is therefore 

particularly pertinent for the analysis of time periods characterized by policy 

shifts and variation. The method is quite suitable for the topic of international 

security in the 2010s and early 2020s, considering the high density of events 

and subsequent policy reorientations in that period.

In addition to comparative historical research, process tracing will be 

used to understand how modifications in the US approach to NATO may have 

translated into adjustments in French defense policy through a step-by-step 

analysis. Process tracing is a “systematic examination” of evidence that is 

“selected and analyzed in light of research questions and hypotheses posed by 

the investigator” (Collier, 2011). A careful description of how events unfolded 

throughout the period will help foreground causal processes. Process tracing is 

a   relevant   choice   of   method   for   the   present   topic,   as   it   is   suitable   for   the 

identification of new political phenomena and making inferences based on 

data which does not easily lend itself to conventional means of analysis, such 

as regression. 

Finally,   the   narrative   method   will   complement   any   findings   by 

examining the main ideas and patterns of documents. A careful analysis will 

be undertaken by highlighting key words in the relevant texts.

 
28

1. Brief overview of US-French military cooperation over time

1.1 US-French Military Relations in the Cold War (1945-1991)

The defense relationship between France and the United States 

developed significantly in the 1900s, due to such events as the two World 

Wars and the ensuing Cold War. In historical retrospect, the United States 

progressively abandoned its isolationist stance in a transitionary period 

spanning the World Wars and the interwar years. After a period of American 

retreat from world affairs in the 1920s and 1930s, military cooperation 

became far more extensive from 1941 onwards, when the United States 

entered World War II on the side of the Allies and embarked on an enormous 

rearmament strategy. The USA provided aid to France through the 

Lend-Lease program, and liberated the country from German occupation over 

the summer of 1944. Cooperation also tightened with a system of shared 

control over defeated Germany through the Allied Control Council, in which 

France, the United States and Great Britain each administered their zone of 

Germany (Ziemke, 1975). Moreover, in 1949, France and the United States 

were among the founding members of a new collective security alliance, the 

North Atlantic Treaty Organization. There were some frictions during the war, 

as the Roosevelt administration was not particularly fond of General Charles 

de Gaulle, who was leading a French government in exile (Statler, 2023). The 

latter’s obstinate character would cause a deeper rift in US-French relations in 

the post-war period, culminating in France’s decision to leave the integrated 

command structure of NATO in 1966 (though still remaining a treaty 

member). The headquarters of the organization were initially located at the 

outskirts of Paris, but were moved to Brussels the following year as a result of 

the French departure (France Channel, 2024; NATO, 2024a). France also 

independently developed its own nuclear weapons program in 1960 (Nuclear 

Threat Initiative, 2025).

29

In general terms, the foreign policy priorities of France, which was an 

imperial power in severe decline, differed significantly from those of the 

United States, a rising superpower ideologically and rhetorically opposed to 

colonialism. The two countries also differed in their approach to the 

management of West Germany in the post-war years. This prompted France to 

pursue a line of action that was more autonomous from the United States, in 

particular compared to the UK, which to a much greater extent fused its 

foreign policy with that of the USA and developed the so-called ‘special 

relationship’ (Hein, 2002). Besides NATO, other points of disagreement in the 

area of defense policy included the Vietnam War and the 1956 Suez Crisis. De 

Gaulle opposed American intervention into the former French colony of 

Indochina, while the United States condemned the so-called Tripartite 

aggression against Egypt and the Suez Canal, in which France participated. 

The 1950s and 1960s therefore proved to be a rather tumultuous period in 

US-French relations, despite increased military, economic and political 

coordination. After the end of decolonization and De Gaulle’s definitive 

retreat from politics in 1968, however, relations between the two states 

smoothed out, anchored in the common interest of countering and deterring 

the Soviet Union (Statler, 2016).

1.2 Post-Cold War Realignment (1991-2017)

Following the end of the Cold War in 1991, a new age of US-French 

military cooperation began. France did not accommodate rapidly to the 

changed security environment that the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact 

represented. Relations between France and the United States improved over 

the 1990s under the presidencies of François Mitterrand and Bill Clinton, as 

the latter viewed an enhanced European component in NATO more positively 

30

than previous American administrations. It should be noted that France at that 

point in time was championing European integration - the European 

Commission President was French Jacques Delors, who decisively contributed 

to the creation of the single market and the signing of the 1992 Maastricht 

Treaty. Under Clinton, the notion of Combined Joint Task Forces was 

incorporated into NATO in order to address unconventional security issues, 

and was partly a response to the unfolding civil war in the former Yugoslavia. 

It satisfied to some degree the French desire for a more autonomous European 

defense (Sloan, 1997), though any further realignment of France with NATO 

would only occur a decade later. Another major problem was the 

ineffectiveness of the French armed forces, which had become apparent 

during the 1990-1991 Gulf War, and which, together with budget constraints, 

incited Jacques Chirac to undertake a series of reforms in the late 1990s. The 

nuclear triad was reduced by abolishing the country’s intercontinental ballistic 

missile capabilities, leaving only strategic aircraft bombers and 

submarine-launched missiles. Conventional forces were also reformed and 

reduced so as to focus on more compact, adaptable and versatile units (ibid.).

The so-called unipolar moment of the United States created such a big 

power differential between the USA and all other states that France was 

forced to reconsider its relations to the American giant. By the 2000s, French 

dissatisfaction with what they perceived as an excessively preponderant role 

of the USA in international affairs led them to attempt a sort of rebalancing 

against the USA, albeit only a rhetorical one. The European integration 

process, which reached its peak in the early 2000s, gave new steam to the idea 

of European autonomy from the United States, and a number of French 

politicians supported the advent of a multipolar world order that could replace 

the unipolar one, which they deeply resented due to the perception that France 

was being sidelined by the Americans. If multipolarity came to be, it was 

31

reasoned, France could play a more prominent role internationally as part of a 

European pole. These musings would, however, have few practical 

consequences (Schmitt, 2017), as other European Union states, in particular 

the new members of the former socialist block, continued to favor NATO as 

the foremost security structure for the continent.

The overarching trend in the period after 1991 is therefore the gradual 

realization of the French political leadership that the country is incapable not 

only of facing new security challenges on its own, but even in concert with its 

European neighbors (Sloan, 1997). This explains the rapprochement witnessed 

between the United States and France, which led France to rejoin NATO’s 

integrated command structure in 2009 under Nicolas Sarkozy. French 

participation in a number of US-led initiatives and ongoing operations grew 

following the return to NATO’s central command. For instance, Sarkozy 

chose to boost the French presence in Afghanistan, a move that was welcomed 

by the Obama administration (Schmitt, 2017). France also became, along with 

the UK, the most important ally in Syria after the United States by the 

mid-2010s espoused a policy of gradually deeper intervention into the civil 

war.

There is still a strong Gaullist political undercurrent in the country that 

impels it to pursue autonomous foreign policy on defense matters, most 

evidently observed in 2003 with the French refusal to assist the USA in its 

unsanctioned invasion of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. Still, US-French 

cooperation in military matters has expanded, for instance to counter terrorist 

threats in the post-9/11 era (Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, 2025). In that 

regard, France’s increased military presence in the Sahel region, such as its 

extended intervention in Mali, was praised in Washington, D.C. Whereas 

American policymakers at the start of the new millennium took a dim view of 

what they saw as French uncooperativeness, they had by the middle of the 

32

next decade come to see France as one of their most reliable partners. Thus, 

by the time Emmanuel Macron and Donald Trump entered office as presidents 

of France and the USA, respectively, the former country had become much 

more solidly embedded in the transatlantic framework than was previously the 

case (Schmitt, 2017). 

33

2. The Impact of US Policy on French Defense Policy

2.1 Presidency of Donald Trump (2017-2021)

On   January   20th,   2017,   Donald   Trump   was   inaugurated   as   the   45th 

President of the United States, being handed over the presidential powers by 

the Democrat government of Barack Obama. The ensuing four years would in 

more than one way prove to be an anomaly in American political life. The 

blunt   rhetoric   and   unconventional   campaign   employed   by   the   Republican 

candidate, involving a bypassing of traditional media houses through the use 

of social media like X (formerly Twitter), sparked controversy on both sides 

of the main fault line in US politics. Trump represented a significant shift in 

the way politics was conducted, not only in relation to the Democratic Party 

he competed against, but also seen in the context of the Republican Party he 

had integrated, and whose long-standing conventions and stances on a number 

of   issues   were   upturned   by   the   arrival   of   what   was   at   the   time   largely 

perceived as an outsider. It could be argued that in no other policy area was 

this more manifest than in that of foreign policy.

While Trump expressed unorthodox views on a host of topics such as 

the   economy,   trade   and   tariffs,   women   and   minority   rights,   immigration, 

climate change and national healthcare, his most far-reaching contributions 

were arguably in the realm of foreign policy. The President upset conventions, 

both in his treatment of time-hallowed allies as well as his outreach to foreign 

leaders and states typically understood to be rivals of the United States, such 

as North Korea, Russia and Iran. Collectively, this produced a paradigmatic 

rearrangement of international affairs, with ripple effects to the present day. 

The advent of the first Trump administration in 2017, taken together with the 

decision   of   the   UK   to   leave   the   European   Union   in   2016,   the   events   in 

Ukraine in 2014, and the general rise of a more assertive China, is frequently 

34

cited by scholars as ushering in a multipolar world order, putting a decisive 

end to the so-called unipolar moment of the United States (Wyne, 2019).

Key words to the foreign policy of Donald Trump include the trade war 

with China, an attempted defrosting of US-Russian relations, the withdrawal 

from the Iran nuclear deal, multiple head-to-head meetings with North Korean 

leader   Kim   Jong   Un,   the   Syrian   Civil   War,   and   contestation   of   American 

presence in Europe (as well as among allies in East Asia). In all of these areas 

the   approach   adopted   by   the   Republican   leader   constituted   a   pronounced 

rupture   with   previous   administrations,   most   notably   with   the   Obama 

presidency that immediately preceded him.

Overview of the main foreign policy directions and aspirations

The principal document laying out the guidelines for Donald Trump’s 

foreign   policy   is   the   2017   National   Security   Strategy,   a   policy   document 

which is published by the White House at irregular intervals since 2002. It 

was published in December 2017, roughly one year into the presidency, and is 

the   only   National   Security   Strategy   (NSS)   released   by   the   Trump 

administration. It follows the previous NSS, presented by Obama in February 

2015, which in turn had updated an earlier NSS made publicly available in 

2010. For analytical purposes the frequencies of keywords in the different 

NSS’s   have   been   counted   using   tools   provided   by   Microsoft   Office   (see 

Appendix, Table 1).

A comparison of the 2015 and 2017 strategies makes it abundantly clear 

that the global outlooks of Donald Trump are consistently different from those 

of Barack Obama. Trump distances himself markedly from Obama in the way 

he   conceptualizes   the   international   environment   within   which   the   United 

States operates. Obama, though giving attention to some global issues that 

35

pitted the United States against foreign countries, in large part emphasized the 

collective nature of many tasks faced by the USA, arguing that cooperation 

and partnership with allies and non-allies alike were paramount if the country 

was   to   rise   to   the   challenge   (Obama,   2015).   In   that   sense,   Obama   was 

rhetorically   closer   to   the   International   Relations   school   of   liberal 

internationalism.   Trump’s   NSS,   on   the   other   hand,   takes   an   unmistakably 

realist turn, evident in the opening of the third subsection, titled “Preserve 

Peace Through Strength”: “A central continuity in history is the contest for 

power. The present time period is no different.” (Trump, 2017). He goes on to 

broadly criticize US politics in the post-Cold War era centered on multilateral 

institutions and engagement of authoritarian states, for instance the opening 

up   of   the   international   trade   regime   to   China,   describing   this   strategy   as 

ill-advised   and   “complacent”   (ibid.).   Trump   thus   reinstated   great   power 

contest,   largely   dismissed   by   previous   post-1991   presidents,   back   on   the 

foreign policy agenda in a front and center position, visualizing contemporary 

international relations as an arena of fierce competition, even among allies. It 

is telling that the words ‘competition’, ‘competitor’, ‘competitive’ and other 

words of the same root are used 57 times in the 2017 NSS, but only 10 times 

in the 2015 version of the document. Simultaneously, less emphasis is placed 

on normative values, with the use of the terms ‘democracy’ and ‘democratic’ 

scaled back from 45 mentions in the 2015 NSS to 28 mentions in the 2017 

NSS. The role to be played by the United States in such a world is necessarily 

also reevaluated by Trump. While preceding administrations, including the 

two   Obama   cabinets,   to   a   greater   extent   had   underscored   cooperation   and 

international   solidarity   as   the   way   forward,   as   well   as   the   foundational 

importance   of   alliances   and   partnerships,   Trump   recentered   foreign   policy 

around his ‘America First’ slogan. The frequent use of the term ‘homeland’ 

throughout the 2017 NSS is remarkable in this regard, as most foreign policy 

objectives, whether military, security-related, economic or other are defined in 

36

relation   to   the   promotion   of   the   ‘homeland’.   Consequently,   with   the   first 

presidency of Donald Trump there is a certain transition in foreign policy, 

which goes from being quite outwards-looking to becoming inwards-looking 

to an extent vaguely reminiscent of the posture adopted by the United States 

in the interwar period. Still, the changes do not warrant the labeling of a return 

to pre-war isolationism, as the United States continued to be actively engaged 

in a number of foreign theatres and regions over the period 2017-2021.

There is also an unequivocal departure from Obama in the assessment 

of   the   threat   environment   confronting   the   United   States.   Donald   Trump 

painted a far more hostile picture of the outside world. For instance, the words 

‘threat’ and ‘threaten’ are mentioned 53 times by Obama in 2015, but over 

twice as often by Trump in 2017, at 110. The latter identifies three major 

perils to US security.

First, attacks by international terrorist organizations, such as ISIS and 

Al-Qaeda, put societies all around the world at risk of destabilization. Though 

the specific jihadist organizations are given an equal amount of attention by 

the   two   presidents   (11   and   12   mentions   of   ISIS   by   Obama   and   Trump, 

respectively, 9 mentions each for Al-Qaeda), one notes that Trump brings up 

the issue of ‘terrorists’ and ‘terrorism’ much more frequently (70 instances) 

than   Obama   (37   instances).   The   ongoing   civil   war   in   Syria   is   briefly 

mentioned once by Obama, and 6 times by Trump, though this is in line with 

the   evolution   of   the   conflict,   as   American   intervention   into   the   country 

escalated only after Trump was sworn in as president. A major incentive for 

US involvement in Syria was to combat the Islamic State which had taken 

root there.

Second, Trump points to rogue states as a permanent danger for the 

United States, singling out Iran and North Korea as the most prominent ones. 

37

Both countries were given much more attention by Trump than Obama: Iran is 

brought up 17 times by Trump versus 11 by Obama, while North Korea is 

discussed on 16 occasions as opposed to only 3 in Obama’s 2015 NSS.

Finally,   and   most   importantly,   the   2017   NSS   construes   “revisionist” 

states as representing the most serious menace to the leading position of the 

United States globally. The foremost great powers challenging the American 

global order are Russia and China. China is understood to be emerging as a 

peer   competitor   to   the   United   States,   “building   the   most   capable   and 

well-funded military in the world, after our own” (Trump, 2017). China is 

referred   to   38   times   by   Trump,   compared   to   only   15   by   Obama,   which 

indicates how the former cranked up the negative characterization of the PRC. 

The   same   phenomenon   occurred   with   the   Russian   Federation,   which   is 

alluded to 25 times by Trump, an increase from 15 times in Obama’s strategy 

document. The portrayal of the Russian “threat” is substantially distinct in the 

two   National   Security   Strategies.   Obama   mostly   confines   his   approach 

towards   the   country   to   a   condemnation   of   alleged   Russian   “aggression” 

towards Ukraine in 2014 and cautioning European states against deepening 

their   energy   dependence   on   Russia   (Obama,   2015).   Despite   the   heavily 

mediatized allegations of Russian interference into the 2016 US presidential 

elections to the benefit of Trump, the 2017 NSS’s negative assessment of 

Russia is in fact more comprehensive than the one provided by Obama three 

years prior. Russia is understood to be a revisionist state keen to revive its 

status of great power that was lost in 1991, and as a competitor possessing 

considerable   and   constantly   growing   offensive   capabilities.   Notably,   the 

nuclear   weapons   wielded   by   the   Kremlin   are   identified   as   “the   most 

significant existential threat to the United States”. Moreover, Russia is also 

opposed to American “values”, practicing information warfare by exploiting 

the openness of American society with a view to undermining US democratic 

38

institutions. The Russian threat-picture under Trump is thus extensive, ranging 

from regional destabilization through deployment of conventional forces, to 

cyber and nuclear capacity (Trump, 2017).

Another   important   aspect   that   is   clarified   by   the   2017   NSS   is   the 

relationship of the United States towards specific regions, including Europe. 

Despite   there   being   a   change   of   focus   and   perception   of   the   operational 

environment,   the   national   security   strategy   as   formulated   by   Trump   still 

allows for extensive cooperation with other states. Close coordination with US 

allies, be they Atlantic or Pacific partners, is depicted as a desirable aim in 

itself.   In   this   regard   there   is   continuity   with   previous   American 

administrations. A noteworthy trend that emerged in the 2010s, and which 

precedes Trump, is the so-called pivot to Asia, the shift of priority from the 

Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean as the geopolitically most interesting region for 

the United States. This is clearly spelled out in the order in which different 

regions of concern for the USA appear in both the 2015 and 2017 National 

Security Strategies: Asia and the Indo-Pacific are listed first, Europe comes 

second. The European allies, though clearly no longer occupying the center of 

the stage in US foreign policy, are nonetheless underscored as an important 

source   of   US   security   and   a   useful   instrument   for   the   White   House   in 

furthering   its   objectives   of   global   stability,   which   in   its   view   can   only   be 

achieved   through   the   prevention   of   the   emergence   of   regional   hegemons. 

Trump   sees   Europe   as   particularly   vulnerable   and   at   a   crossroads,   being 

subjected to the risk of Russian subversion, Chinese economic infiltration and 

Islamic terrorism emanating from the adjacent Middle East. The presence of 

the United States in Europe is consequently advisable, not only to support 

European allies, but also to use Europe as a means to facilitate American 

policy-making elsewhere, such as in its interventions in the Middle East.

39

In   the   2017   NSS,   Trump   maintains   that   the   “United   States   remains 

firmly committed to our European allies and partners” as well as “to Article V 

of   the   Washington   Treaty”,   which   underpins   the   North   Atlantic   Treaty 

Organization. However, there is nonetheless a significant departure from the 

Clinton,   Bush   and   Obama   presidencies,   in   that   Trump   is   not   content   with 

leading the alliance. References to NATO and allies in general come with a 

clearly stated expectation that partners “shoulder a fair share of the burden of 

responsibility”, a message that is repeated throughout the document. Trump 

thus   stresses   the   notion   of   reciprocity   as   a   sine   qua   non   for   continued 

cooperation. As regards NATO, the president incites other member states to 

become more accountable to the organization and take on more responsibility, 

with   an   explicit   request   that   European   members   boost   their   military 

expenditures to reach a benchmark of 2% by 2024 (Trump, 2017).

Evolution of Donald Trump’s policy towards NATO

Over the course of the four years of Trump’s first mandate, there were 

considerable fluctuations in the manner the President approached the question 

of NATO, though the demand that other member states augment their defense 

spending   was   a   constant   throughout   the   period.   The   attitude   exhibited   by 

Trump towards the alliance varied strongly from considering the organization 

pointless and outdated, to vigorously praising its work and significance to the 

United States.

In   the   months   leading   up   to   his   election,   Trump   repeatedly   called 

NATO “obsolete”, claiming that the other allies were “ripping off” the USA 

by   not   paying   enough   for   defense   (McCaskill,   2017).   A   major   reason   for 

calling   NATO   obsolete   was   its   limited   involvement   in   counterterrorism, 

which was an important topic for Trump in the early stages of his presidency, 

40

with a particular focus on the civil war in Syria. Trump’s first interaction with 

a leader from a foreign country occurred on January 27, 2017, a week after his 

inauguration. The British Prime Minister, Theresa May, was received in the 

White House for a bilateral meeting, in which defense and the North Atlantic 

Treaty   Organization   were   discussed,   among   other   topics.   Following   the 

meeting, the two heads of government held a joint press conference, which 

May opened by reading out a prepared statement, with Trump subsequently 

doing   the   same.   The   event   proved   ominous,   as   only   May   opted   to   make 

explicit mentions of NATO during the conference, stating that “we are united 

in our recognition of NATO as the bulwark of our collective defense”, before 

adding   that   they   had   “reaffirmed   [their]   unshakeable   commitment   to   this 

alliance   -   Mr.   President,   I   think   you   confirmed   that   you   are   100   percent 

behind NATO” (Holland & Piper, 2017). There was therefore from the onset 

considerable ambiguity among allied leaders on the level of commitment that 

would be demonstrated by the new Republican administration, though these 

doubts   somewhat   dissipated   after   statements   made   by   the   White   House   in 

February. In a phone call with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg on 

February 5, followed by a press briefing two days later, the President stated 

his   full   devotion   to   the   alliance,   but   also   raised   the   issue   of   unequal 

distribution of defense spending among members (The White House, 2017a; 

The White House, 2017b). A number of similar and related declarations were 

made by Trump in the following months, for instance an affirmation in March 

2017 that Germany was severely indebted to the USA by virtue of the security 

provided by American servicemen to the country. The claims were refuted by 

the German government and Ursula von der Leyen, the Minister of Defense 

(Martin,   2017),   but   contributed   to   shaping   increasingly   strained   relations 

between the two sides of the Atlantic.

41

Donald   Trump’s   approach   to   the   organization   would   then   oscillate 

during the year and a half leading up to the 2018 NATO summit in Brussels, a 

key event. He first met with Secretary General Stoltenberg in person at the 

White House on April 12, 2017. During that meeting, the American president 

disowned his own statement about the obsolescence of NATO, arguing that 

NATO   had   found   new   purpose   in   helping   combat   the   Islamic   state   and 

terrorism   more   generally.   Trump   also   declared   that   he   had   reached   an 

agreement with Stoltenberg that the other member states must step up their 

military expenditure to target a 2% of GDP minimum (NATO, 2017a). The 

focus on counterterrorism was also manifest during a NATO summit held in 

Brussels in May 2025, in which NATO formally accepted to become part of 

an international coalition against ISIS, a decision that was mostly interpreted 

as a symbolic gesture of goodwill towards the US leader. Trump also used the 

summit as an opportunity to again voice his long-standing dissatisfaction with 

defense   budgets   to   other   leaders   (Boffey   &   Rankin,   2017).   Countries   that 

fulfilled   the   expectation   of   2%   lower   limit   on   defense   spending   were   on 

occasion praised by Trump, such as his commendation of Poland during a 

state visit to the country in July that year (The White House, 2017c).

Some   international   security-related   policies   pursued   by   the   Trump 

administration   during   the   first   two   years   of   his   mandate   were   met   with 

criticism   from   European   NATO   countries,   and   this   could   be   said   to   have 

further shook the foundations of the transatlantic partnership. Most notably, 

the United States opted to resume investments and research in the field of 

cruise   missile   technology   with   the   signing   of   the   National   Defense 

Authorization   Act   on   December   12,   2017.   This   violated   provisions   in   the 

1988 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty between the USA and USSR 

(subsequently upheld by Russia), considered a cornerstone of Euro-Atlantic 

security,   and   prompted   the   North   Atlantic   Council   to   issue   a   statement 

42

exhorting the United States to comply with the INF Treaty (NATO, 2017b). 

The USA would, however, eventually withdraw entirely from the agreement 

in   2019,   with   support   from   allies   (NATO,   2019a).   Another   contentious 

moment arose with the announced withdrawal by Trump from the so-called 

Iran nuclear deal in May 2018. The framework for the agreement had been 

jointly   elaborated   by   the   United   States   under   Obama   with   three   European 

partners - France, the UK and Germany, and the de facto annulment by Trump 

was poorly received (European Commission, 2018).

Transatlantic   relations   had   thus   soured   noticeably   by   mid-2018,   at 

which point they can be said to have reached a new low. In meetings with 

Stoltenberg and other member states, relations appeared tense, in particular 

with Canada and France. Trump reiterated his demands for higher defense 

expenditure   by   the   other   members,   and   also   hinted   at   the   possibility   of 

returning Russia to the G7, which was met with protests by the European 

members of the grouping (The White House, 2018; Liptak, 2018). Tensions 

finally escalated during a common breakfast organized on July 11 during the 

first   day   of   the   2018   NATO   summit   in   Brussels.   In   a   highly   mediatized 

confrontation,   Trump   harshly   rebuked   Secretary   General   for   the   lack   of 

funding   by   European   member   states   to   the   organization   (U.S.   Embassy   in 

Estonia, 2021), pointing out that only four members beside the United States 

(Estonia, Greece, Poland and the UK) met the objective of 2% of GDP. He 

further openly speculated that the target rate of spending should be doubled to 

4%, and criticized Germany in particular for its close cooperation with the 

Russian fossil fuel industry while only devoting 1.2% of its GDP to its armed 

forces (MacAskill & Crerar, 2018).

For   the   remaining   part   of   Trump’s   first   presidential   mandate,   the 

approach taken towards the transatlantic alliance softened up, in part due to a 

number of European states committing themselves to increased spending. By 

43

2020, 9 member states were satisfying the target 2% of GDP rate (NATO 

Public   Diplomacy   Division,   2024a).   The   Secretary   General   had   played   an 

important   role   in   persuading   other   members   to   ramp   up   investments   into 

military infrastructure. A meeting between Trump and Stoltenberg was held 

on April 2, 2019 in the White House, and unfolded in a good atmosphere. The 

US leader congratulated the Secretary General, whose mandate had recently 

been extended for another five years, and commended him for his support in 

helping to instigate the European members to follow up on collective burden 

sharing. Stoltenberg, for his part, lauded Trump for his “strong leadership” 

(The White House, 2019). Stoltenberg would go on to repeat his appraisal of 

Trump in a second meeting held in April that year (NATO, 2019b), while 

Trump affirmed in December at the 2019 summit that “NATO is stronger than 

it’s   ever   been”   (Vazquez,   2019).   Notwithstanding   a   moderation   of   official 

rhetoric, repeated demands for budget increases and expressed dissatisfaction 

with perceived free riders among the alliance never abated.

Trump’s   last   year   in   the   White   House   was   generally   uneventful   as 

relates to questions of foreign policy and international security. There were 

generally few summits or meetings between heads of state and government 

due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Little attention was given by world leaders to 

other topics, including the transatlantic partnership and security issues. During 

a virtual NATO summit between the countries’ Ministers of Foreign Affairs 

held in December 2020,   the outgoing Trump administration, represented by 

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, reiterated the United States’ faithfulness to 

the organization (Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, n.d.).

44

Evolution of US-French relations under Donald Trump

US-French relations also saw some variation over the period, albeit less 

so than was the case with NATO as a whole. This can partially be attributed to 

relatively high defense contributions made by France, close to the 2% target 

rate (World Bank, 2025), as well as a lack of opposition from the French 

government to the demands made by Trump. Emmanuel Macron appeared to 

welcome a certain decoupling between the United States and Europe, favoring 

the   development   and   consolidation   of   purely   European   defense   initiatives 

instead. In addition, the personal relationship between Macron and Trump was 

a rather positive one. Disagreements, however, emerged over the handling of 

the civil war in Syria and associated fight against international terrorism.

The   first   direct   interaction   between   Trump   and   then   president-elect 

Macron occurred on May 8, 2017 through a phone call, in which the leaders 

agreed to arrange a meeting on the sidelines of the upcoming NATO later that 

month (Johnson, 2017). During that meeting, the two men engaged in a series 

of   long   and   uncomfortable   handshakes,   with   Macron   refusing   to   let   go   of 

Trump’s hand on two occasions. Still, they got off to a good start in their 

relationship, with the two presidents congratulating each other on their recent 

electoral   victories   (Boffey   &   Rankin,   2017).   Their   alleged   friendship   was 

frequently dubbed a ‘bromance’ by the media (Bell & Masters, 2018), but 

encountered some hurdles mid-way through the period. 

Upon entering office, Trump had withdrawn the United States from the 

2015 Paris Agreement, and an important topic for the newly elected French 

president would be to convince him to reconsider addressing climate change. 

Macron brought up the issue on several occasions, including Trump’s state 

visit to France on July 13-14, 2017, during which he attended the Bastille Day 

military   parade,   and   during   his   own   state   visit   to   the   USA   in   April   the 

45

following year (Chrisafis, 2017; Davis, 2018). Macron was unsuccessful in his 

attempts, but fared better in discussions on how to manage the repercussions 

of the Syrian conflict. Cooperation between the USA, the UK and France on 

Syria   tightened   in   2017-2018,   and   Trump’s   decision   to   intervene   directly 

against the Assad regime through missile strikes was welcomed by France, in 

particular as a response to the alleged use of chemical weapons by the Syrian 

leader (CBS News, 2018). In other words, the common interest in pursuing 

counterterrorist   operations,   an   important   aspiration   for   Trump   in   his   early 

political career, allowed a certain rapprochement between the United States 

and France, even as transatlantic relations suffered. Over time, however, the 

achievements   of   the   shared   operations   would   be   undermined   by   Trump’s 

unilateralist and isolationist instincts. Thus, the abrupt decision by Trump to 

pull out American ground troops, which numbered around two thousand, from 

Northeast   Syria   in   October   2019   confounded   the   French   allies,   who   had 

fought with the United States (Borger & Chulov, 2019; Smith, 2019). The 

French government was specifically concerned with the power vacuum left by 

the USA in Northern Syria, which paved the way for a Turkish invasion of the 

region. Macron subjected Trump to severe criticism, going as far as stating 

that the North Atlantic Alliance was in a state of “brain death” in an interview 

given to The Economist (The Economist, 2019), an assertion that shocked 

other member states. At the 2019 NATO summit in London, Trump, along 

with   Secretary   General   Stoltenberg,   sharply   criticized   Macron   for   his 

wording, deeming it “insulting” and maintaining that the alliance “serves a 

great purpose” (NATO, 2019c). A bilateral meeting was held between Trump 

and Macron at the summit, and was marked by tensions and disagreements 

over several issues, in particular over the civil war in Syria. It was noted that 

the once cordial relationship between the two heads of state had perceptibly 

deteriorated since the early days of 2017, when they attained office (Vazquez 

&   Malloy,   2019).   The   United   States   would   later   partially   backtrack   the 

46

decision to withdraw from Syria, transferring its troops to the eastern parts of 

the country to prevent seizure of valuable petroleum sources by the Islamic 

State (Al Jazeera, 2019). 

Cooperation   in   the   sphere   of   counterterrorism   also   occurred   in   the 

Sahel,   though   the   conflicts   in   West   Africa   were   arguably   of   far   lesser 

importance to the United States than those in Syria. The Sahel, a geopolitical 

region that includes the five former French colonies of Chad, Niger, Burkina 

Faso, Mali and Mauritania (collectively referred to as the G5 Sahel), has been 

one of the most important foreign policy dimensions for France, which has 

sought to retain its influence in West Africa after decolonization. The region 

has   been   transformed   since   the   Arab   Spring   by   a   series   of   insurrections 

conducted by Islamist terrorist movements, as well as military coups in the 

2020s that have deposed several of the leaders that until then had cooperated 

with   Western   military   forces   for   the   maintenance   of   peace   and   stability. 

France notably conducted Operation Barkhane in the Sahel between 2014 and 

2022 and in that respect wielded a significant military presence of over 5000 

troops in the region. French and US forces in the Sahel for many years had a 

shared objective of preventing the spread of radical Islamist ideology from the 

Sahel   to   adjacent   parts   of   Africa   and   beyond   (France   24,   2021a;   Yochai, 

2025).

There was an asymmetry in involvement in the Sahel by the United 

States and France, with the latter country continuously expressing an interest 

in having US soldiers assist its counterterrorist operation to a greater extent. 

Notwithstanding   the   generally   negative   attitude   to   multilateral   approaches 

exhibited by the Trump administration, the Sahel region was one of the areas 

where   the   US   collaborated   most   efficiently   with   its   transatlantic   partners, 

foremost of which was France. The American effort did, however, not reach 

beyond a military contribution of annual 45 million dollars, and France carried 

47

the main responsibility of propping up the West-supported regimes in the G5 

Sahel.   The   American   approach   to   the   region   has   consequently   been 

characterized   as   one   of   “indifference”   (Lebovich,   2021),   largely   leaving 

France to manage the security situation in Africa as it saw fit.

Another   significant   development   worthy   of   attention   is   the   so-called 

‘pivot to Asia’, a major turn in US foreign policy. While announced under 

Obama,   the   refocus   to   the   ‘Indo-Pacific’   region   intensified   significantly 

during Donald Trump’s first mandate (Manning, 2018), which impacted the 

White   House’s   approach   to   NATO   as   well   as   appears   to   have   influenced 

France’s own approach to the area. It is remarkable that NATO, a regional 

alliance by definition constrained to the North Atlantic and adjacent countries, 

has come to consider the rise of the PRC as a major topic on its security 

agenda.   NATO   began   to   seriously   consider   China   at   the   2019   summit   in 

London, with subsequent summits devoting increasingly more attention to the 

Asian country. This trajectory, manifestly ushered in by shifts in American 

strategic thinking, has been met with a lukewarm reception by the European 

members of the alliance, who are anxious not to compromise the trade and 

supply chains linking the EU and China in a relation of mutual dependence 

(Simón, 2023). Exceptions, however, include the UK and France, the two EU 

countries that possess territories in Asia, a legacy of their colonial period. 

France, in particular, appears more concerned than the average European state 

by the rise of China, and has readily adopted the new geopolitical concept of 

the ‘Indo-Pacific’ promoted by the United States (Manning, 2018). French 

territories there comprise the islands of La Réunion, Mayotte and the French 

Southern   and   Antarctic   Lands   in   the   Indian   Ocean,   as   well   as   French 

Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna, and New Caledonia in the Pacific Ocean. The 

total population for the overseas possessions is slightly less than 2 million 

inhabitants, but they represent around 90% of France’s exclusive economic 

48

zone (Nicolas, 2019; Shvili, 2021), indicating why the region is understood to 

be important to the country.

During   his   first   and   second   mandates,   Macron   paid   several   official 

visits to the overseas territories, including a visit to Mayotte and La Réunion 

in 2019, to French Polynesia in 2021 and to New Caledonia in 2018 in 2023 

(Élysée,   2021a;   Fontemaggi,   2023;   Razafinarivo,   2025).   The   frequency   of 

visits more or less concur with those of his predecessors, and by themselves 

do not demonstrate a particular increase in metropolitan interest for the region. 

However, while previous trips were mostly concerned with postcolonial issues 

and independence movements, Macron has included a geostrategic element to 

justify his appearances. For instance, during his stay in New Caledonia in 

2018,   Macron   warned   that   “China   is   building   its   hegemony”   in   the 

Indo-Pacific (Tromeur, 2023). 

France   published   its   first   Indo-Pacific   strategy   in   2018,   a   policy 

document outlining French priorities and ambitions for the region, and has 

updated it several times since then (Groupe d’études géopolitiques, 2025). The 

French   strategy   unambiguously   identifies   the   rise   of   China   as   a   source   of 

destabilization   in   the   region,   and   notes   the   increasingly   competitive 

relationship between China and the USA, as the latter country has revalued its 

presence   in   Asia.   Among   other   initiatives,   France   stresses   the   need   to 

elaborate security partnerships with other countries present in the region, and 

singles out Australia, India, Japan and the United States as its closest partners, 

with which France should strive to pursue a “deepening of interoperability” of 

the respective countries’ militaries (Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, 

2021). It is significant that these four Indo-Pacific states otherwise form a 

US-led   loose   grouping   known   as   the   Quadrilateral   Security   Dialogue,   or 

‘Quad’, broadly understood to be a quasi-coalition with an aim to contain 

China (Rajagopalan, 2021). In September 2020, France, along with India and 

49

Australia, instituted a new regular forum for discussing issues pertaining to 

the region, named the Trilateral Dialogue, with one of the stated aims being to 

ensure “maritime safety and security” by enhancing the “interoperability of 

the navies” (Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, 2021). In parallel with 

the development of an Indo-Pacific strategy, France arranged or participated 

in a series of military exercises in the region. These included naval exercise 

La Pérouse in the Gulf of Bengal in 2019, together with the US, Japanese and 

Australian navies (Naval Technology, 2019), and the Croix du Sud exercises 

in New Caledonia, which involves multiple countries participating (Ministry 

for Europe and Foreign Affairs, 2021).

Further   developments   in   US-French   relations   in   the   security   sphere 

were mostly cut off by 2020, due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. 

2.2 Presidency of Joe Biden (2021-2025)

Joe Biden acceded to the presidency of the United States on January 20, 

2025, after a troubled handover of power from Donald Trump. From the very 

onset, Biden volitionally adopted a foreign policy that sought to distinguish 

himself from his predecessor, largely presenting himself as an ‘anti-Trump’. 

Where Donald Trump’s presidency was personified by the slogan ‘America 

First’,   Joe   Biden’s   characterizing   tagline   would   be   ‘America   is   back’, 

deliberately   singling   out   the   outgoing   Republican   administration   as   an 

anomaly and making allusions to deep-rooted post-war traditions of American 

liberal openness to the world, not least to its allies. While the rhetoric and 

public image of Biden stood in stark contrast to that of Trump, there were in 

fact   significant   strands   of   continuity   between   the   two   presidential 

administrations, in addition to important policy divergences.

50

Overview of the main foreign policy directions and aspirations

As with Trump, the principal foreign policy priorities of Joe Biden are 

outlined   in   the   National   Security   Strategy.   Biden   was   quick   to   adopt   an 

interim NSS in his first year as president so as to distance himself from the 

previous president, before releasing a more elaborate document in October 

2022 (Tebin, 2022). For analytical purposes the frequencies of keywords in 

the   different   NSS’s   have   been   counted   using   tools   provided   by   Microsoft 

Office   (see   Appendix,   Table   1).   The   juxtaposition   of   the   2022   National 

Security Strategy with the 2017 Strategy yields some notable deviations from 

the   Trumpian   foreign   policy   line,   but   also   a   few   significant   areas   of 

convergence.

Biden’s National Security Strategy conceptualizes the world as being at 

an “inflection point”, that is, undergoing rapid and drastic changes that the 

United States ought to address and keep up with. The operational environment 

is altogether rendered as less hostile than in Trump’s NSS, with the use of 

words   like   “threat”   and   “threaten”   toned   down   from   110   to   69   mentions. 

Notwithstanding such nuances, the perception that international affairs have 

become   more   contentious   and   confrontational,   already   present   in   the   2017 

NSS, is manifestly reproduced in the 2022 iteration of the document. In fact, 

Joe   Biden   ups   the   ante,   with   “competition”   and   words   of   the   same   root 

repeated 102 times, compared to 57 times under Trump and only 10 times in 

Obama’s   last   NSS   from   2015   (Biden,   2022;   Trump,   2017).   Paradoxically, 

considering   that   Biden   served   eight   years   as   vice   president   under   Obama, 

Biden shares more in common with Trump in his understanding of the world 

as deeply divided and on the verge of major conflict.

The security challenges defined by Biden do, however, differ somewhat 

from those of Trump. In particular, there is a reorientation of attention from 

51

non-state   actors   to   state   actors   as   sources   of   destabilization   and   danger. 

Terrorism does not occupy nearly the same space in Biden’s threat evaluation, 

with all keywords appearing less frequently: “terrorism” and “terrorist” (37 

instances in NSS 2022 versus 70 instances in NSS 2017), Al-Qaeda (3 versus 

9 instances) and ISIS/Islamic State (2 versus 12 instances). In parallel with a 

diminished focus on Islamic terrorist attacks, less attention is also granted to 

the Middle East in general. For example, “Syria” is mentioned only 3 times, 

compared   to   6   in   Trump’s   Strategy.   This   approach   would,   however,   be 

modified   following   the   October   7,   2023   attack   of   Hamas   in   Israel,   which 

renewed American attentiveness to the region. It is also notable how rogue 

states, of which the foremost are Iran and North Korea, are given a more 

superficial treatment. Reference is made to Iran and North Korea only 7 and 3 

times, respectively, compared to 17 and 16 in Trump’s NSS (Biden, 2022; 

Trump, 2017).

Where Joe Biden does concur with Donald Trump, however, is in the 

identification of “revisionist” states as the principal challenge to US security. 

Like Trump, Biden understands China and Russia to be United States’ chief 

competitors on the global arena. China is described as the only country in the 

world   possessing   “both   the   intent   to   reshape   the   international   order   and, 

increasingly, the economic, diplomatic, military and technological power to 

do it” (Biden, 2022). China is mentioned 57 times in Biden’s Strategy, an 

increase from Trump’s 38 mentions (Biden, 2022; Trump, 2017). There is 

thus an important continuity between the Trump and Biden administrations in 

their approach towards the PRC, and in effect the latter did not scale down the 

trade war initiated by his predecessor (Tankersley, 2024). An unprecedented 

amount of attention is devoted to Russia, cited 71 times - far more often than 

any other country, and a considerable increase from Trump’s 25 mentions. 

This should be seen in context with the escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian 

52

conflict   earlier   in   2022   following   the   announcement   of   Russia’s   Special 

Military Operation, as a hike in interest in Ukraine (only one single mention 

made by Trump in the whole 2017 NSS, but 33 mentions in Biden’s NSS) 

parallels the abovementioned pattern for Russia (Biden, 2022, Trump, 2017). 

While the rise of the People’s Republic of China is interpreted as a long-term 

challenge to the US-led world order, Russia is presented more alarmingly as 

an “immediate threat”. The treatment given to China and Russia in Biden’s 

National Security Strategy has in common that both are draped in a negative 

characterization centering on their state system of “authoritarian governance”. 

Biden   thus   draws   a   sharp   distinction   between   the   allegedly   progressive 

American   vision   for   the   world   and   the   “illiberal”   agenda   of   its   two   main 

rivals. It is noteworthy how the whole document is suffused with classical 

liberal rhetoric and commonplace formulations, with the terms “democracy” 

and “democratic” being repeated 99 times throughout (Biden, 2022).

Finally,   allusions   to   the   ‘pivot   to   Asia’   announced   by   Obama,   and 

which were visibly present during Trump’s presidency, are also to be found in 

Biden’s conception of national security. The Indo-Pacific is again listed first 

among the regions in the “Our strategy by region” section of the 2022 NSS, 

and   headlined   as   “Promote   a   Free   and   Open   Indo-Pacific”,   immediately 

followed by Europe under the heading “Deepen Our Alliance with Europe”. 

While the former region is clearly stated to be “the epicenter of 21st century 

geopolitics” and no “region will be of more significance to the world”, there 

de facto appears to be a refocusing back towards the European continent. It is 

telling that references made to “Europe” and “Europeans” are made over three 

times more frequently than to “Asia” and “Asians” (Biden, 2022). This can 

once more be interpreted as a consequence of the crisis in Ukraine, which 

resumed during Biden’s mandate.

53

Evolution of Joe Biden’s policy towards NATO

The transatlantic partnership was a central pillar of Joe Biden’s defense 

and   foreign   policy,   and   underwent   a   renewal   over   the   course   of   his 

presidential period. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is referred to 19 

times throughout the 2022 NSS, an increase from the 6 mentions in the 2017 

NSS.   Biden’s   appraisal   of   NATO   centers   on   two   dimensions:   its   role   in 

propping up the United States in the conflict that opposes it to Russia since 

2022,   and   its   role   in   preserving   security   and   stability   on   the   European 

continent, which in turn relies on deterrence. The US President highlighted the 

reinforcement   of   the   Eastern   European   flank   under   way,   as   well   as   the 

enlargement of the alliance in Northern Europe, adding Finland and Sweden 

to its list of members. The vow to upholding Article 5 of the North Atlantic 

Treaty   is   restated   more   forcefully   than   in   previous   National   Security 

Strategies, with formulations such as “the United States will defend every inch 

of NATO territory” and “America remains unequivocally committed” to the 

stipulations “enshrined in NATO’s Article 5”. The document also assesses the 

organization   to   be   “stronger   and   more   united   than   it   has   ever   been”. 

Simultaneously, the notion of burden sharing, while not underscored to the 

same extent, carries over from Trump’s approach to the alliance. Thus, in 

Biden’s view, the United States still expects its transatlantic partners, and the 

European ones in particular, “to continue assuming greater responsibility by 

increasing their spending, capabilities and contributions” (Biden, 2022).

The Biden administration’s approach towards NATO can be divided 

into two phases: one preceding the start of the Special Military Operation on 

February   24,   2022   and   spanning   roughly   one   year,   and   another   running 

parallel   to   the   evolution   of   the   SMO.   The   initial   period   was   mostly 

concentrated on reaffirming American dedication to the alliance, and sought 

to mitigate the perceived damage that the Trump administration had caused. 

54

This mostly took the form of renewed assurances and trust-building. Within 

one   week   of   taking   office,   Biden   had   a   phone   call   with   NATO   Secretary 

General   Jens   Stoltenberg,   whose   declared   aim   was   to   reconstruct   the 

partnership. Biden’s election was deemed “the start of a new chapter for our 

transatlantic Alliance”, and both leaders underscored the “need to maintain the 

momentum   for   increased   defence   spending”   (NATO,   2021),   that   is,   the 

insistence on burden sharing inherited from the days of Trump was retained. 

The main event of that first period was the 2021 summit in Brussels, during 

which   the   NATO   2030   agenda   was   adopted.   The   agenda   is   devised   as   a 

program   setting   goals   for   the   modernization   of   the   organization,   while 

broadening   its   scope   to   also   include   cybersecurity   and   climate   security 

(NATO,   2022).   While   Russia   is   designated   as   the   principal   obstacle   to 

stability in the Euro-Atlantic region, more recent geopolitical considerations 

originating in the United States were clearly influential on the making of the 

agenda. Once more, it is notable that the rise of China is presented as a cause 

of concern for the alliance, despite this being beyond the remit of the alliance. 

This strand of thought first appeared during the 2019 London summit, but was 

solidified   with   the   2030   agenda   (Simón,   2023).   The   intertwining   of   the 

Euro-Atlantic   and   Indo-Pacific   regions,   a   foreign   policy   trajectory   that   is 

mainly   pushed   by   the   United   States,   has   direct   implications   for   France   in 

particular, as the latter country possesses several territories in both the Indian 

and Pacific Oceans.

During   the   second   phase,   after   the   onset   of   the   Special   Military 

Operation in Ukraine, the role of the United States in NATO would emerge as 

a coordinator in the efforts to prop up the Ukrainian side of the conflict. Most 

of the endeavors undertaken by Biden vis-a-vis NATO for the remaining three 

years of his presidency can be seen as a response to the intensification of the 

fighting   in   Ukraine.   This   is   also   apparent   from   the   frequency   of   NATO 

55

summits, with six top-level plenum meetings organized over the course of his 

mandate. Thus, with the exception of George W. Bush, more NATO summits 

were held under Biden than any other US president in history, despite Biden 

serving   only   one   term   as   president   (NATO,   2024b).   The   response   by   the 

Biden   administration   was   multipronged,   and   included   expanding   the 

organization   to   new   members   Finland   and   Sweden,   a   decision   which   was 

approved   by   the   US   Congress   and   ratified   presidentially   in   August   2022 

(Macias,   2022),   reinforcing   the   eastern   member   states,   for   instance   by 

transferring   three   thousand   combat   troops   from   North   Carolina   to   Poland 

(Burns,   2022),   implementing   economic   sanctions   against   Russia,   and 

providing the Armed Forces of Ukraine with equipment and intelligence, all 

while repeating the claim that NATO remained open to a potential Ukrainian 

membership at an unspecified time in the future (Trelsman, 2024). 

Data published by NATO on an annual basis indicate that the policies 

of   Trump   and   Biden   towards   the   alliance,   though   delivered   in   starkly 

contrasting   language,   appear   to   have   had   a   real   impact   on   the   defense 

expenditures of the other member states. The most revealing statistic is the 

number of NATO member states meeting the target defense spending rate of 

2% of GDP. It increased from 4 members in 2017, when Trump took office, to 

9   members   when   he   left   office.   For   Biden,   the   equivalent   numbers   are   6 

members in 2021, up to 23 members in an estimation for 2024. Thus, there is 

an   overall   increase   from   4   to   23   member   states   fulfilling   the   minimum 

requirements. There was also an upward trend in real changes for non-US 

NATO   expenditure,   with   each   consecutive   year   between   2017   and   2024 

witnessing an increase in collective defense spending, with 2017 (5.9%), 2023 

(9.3%) and 2024 (17.9%) seeing the largest increases over the previous year. 

Measured in constant 2015 prices, the total amount spent on defense for said 

members   augmented   considerably,   from   277   billion   dollars   to   430   billion 

56

dollars.   However,   it   could   be   argued   that   the   escalation   of   the   conflict   in 

Ukraine had the most impact on European countries’ willingness to invest in 

their militaries, considering that the largest spikes across all statistics occurred 

in 2023 and 2024. Measured in fixed 2015 prices, France experienced a slight 

increase in defense spending between 2017 and 2021 (from 1.78% of GDP to 

1.91%), as well as from 2017 to 2024 (1.78% to 2.06%). Defense spending 

per capita also saw an upsurge, from 668 dollars in 2017 to 720 dollars in 

2021,   and   801   dollars   in   an   estimate   for   2024   (NATO   Public   Diplomacy 

Division, 2024a).

Evolution of US-French relations under Joe Biden

Franco-American   relations   evolved   according   to   a   different   pattern 

during   the   four   years   of   Joe   Biden’s   administration   than   during   the   four 

preceding years, when Trump was in the White House. While Trump’s period 

had seen an initially strong start with cordial exchanges between Trump and 

Macron,   then   followed   by   a   progressive   cooling   down   of   the   amicable 

discourse, the period under Biden displayed an almost inverted tendency, as 

his administration experienced a major crisis in bilateral relations with France 

in his first year in office, before relations slowly improved over the remainder 

of the mandate. In the domain of defense, the conflict in Ukraine was clearly 

the   most   significant   topic   drawing   the   two   nations   together.   Nevertheless, 

there were also developments in other areas, such as Afghanistan, the Sahel, 

counterterrorism, the Gaza war and the Indo-Pacific.

Emmanuel Macron was among the first foreign leaders contacted by Joe 

Biden upon inauguration, reflecting his status as one of the United States’ 

foremost partners. Biden first spoke with Macron in late January 2021, which 

marked the first contact between the two men in their capacity as heads of 

57

state, and referred to France as “our oldest ally”. The stated aim of the new 

US president was to reinforce the bilateral relationship, for which purpose the 

main   venue   was   identified   as   the   transatlantic   system.   The   presidents   also 

staked out a set of foreign policy priorities common to the two states, namely 

China, Russia, the Middle East and the Sahel (The White House, 2021a). The 

interaction   was   followed   up   by   a   second   phone   call   with   Vice   President 

Kamala Harris on February 15, in which many of the same talking points were 

discussed (The White House, 2021b). Biden and Macron then met in person at 

Carbis   Bay,   the   UK   on   June   12   at   the   annual   G7   summit.   The   bilateral 

meeting   organized   at   the   sidelines   of   the   multilateral   conference   focused 

mainly on healthcare and economic affairs, though the need to “modernize” 

NATO was also brought up, as well as security issues of prime concern to 

both countries, most notably China, Russia and counterterrorism in the Sahel 

region (U.S. Mission to France, 2021a).

The apparently harmonious bilateral relations gave way, however, to 

some tensions by the end of Biden’s first year in the White House, which 

became   manifest   with   the   chaotic   withdrawal   of   the   United   States   from 

Afghanistan   in   August   2021.   France   had   cooperated   closely   with   its   US 

partners in the country during several administrations following the invasion 

in 2001, before finally pulling out its combat troops in 2014, leaving mainly 

civilian   personnel   left   for   civic   and   human   rights   efforts.   The   remaining 

French nationals, as well as hundreds of Afghans that had worked for the 

French, hastily left Afghanistan in conjunction with the American departure. 

France   also   played   a   central   role   in   evacuating   other   EU   citizens   (Élysée, 

2021b).   The   disorganized   closure   to   the   allied   operation   in   Afghanistan, 

precipitated by the US decision to terminate its presence on Afghan soil, was 

met with criticism from the French government, though Macron reaffirmed 

his   sympathies   for   the   initial   motives   that   had   led   the   United   States   to 

58

intervene in the country in 2001. In particular, Macron expressed dismay at 

the refusal of Joe Biden to prolong the evacuation process beyond August 

31st, which would have granted other foreign stakeholders precious time to 

organize their own withdrawal, but simultaneously cautioned against labeling 

it as a “betrayal” (China Daily, 2021; Élysée, 2021b). Biden, after facing both 

bipartisan   and   international   criticism,   responded   by   rejecting   the 

remonstrances,   declaring   that   it   was   still   the   “right   decision”.   Part   of   the 

motivation   to   end   the   war   in   Afghanistan   was   a   desire   to   refocus   foreign 

policy on China and Russia (The White House, 2021c).

A much larger rift in bilateral US-French relations would emerge the 

ensuing   month   in   connection   with   the   announcement   of   AUKUS   on 

September 15. AUKUS - short for Australia, United Kingdom and United 

States - is a security partnership between three Anglo-Saxon countries, largely 

interpreted as a measure taken to contest the PRC’s growing influence in the 

Indo-Pacific region. As part of the agreement, Australia agreed to purchase a 

series   of   eight   nuclear-powered   submarines   from   the   United   States   in 

upcoming   years.   The   direct   consequence   of   the   announcement   was   the 

cancellation of a similar deal to acquire twelve diesel-powered Attack-class 

submarines   from   France.   The   latter   business   partnership   had   been   in   the 

making since 2016, and was estimated to cost Australia around 65 billion US 

dollars, which would have benefitted the French defense industry (Vazquez, 

2021a). The French Naval Group partners to the Australian deal were not 

notified in due time, learning about the cancellation upon the announcement 

of AUKUS. The news were met with shock and perplexity among the French 

political   elite,   which   denounced   the   rupture   as   a   betrayal   (Vaissié,   2025). 

French Minister of Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian went as far as calling 

the move a “stab in the back”. Two days after the proclamation of the new 

partnership,   France   called   back   its   ambassadors   to   the   United   States   and 

59

Australia,   an   unprecedented   step   in   the   more   recent   history   of   bilateral 

relations. (Vazquez, 2021a).

In   the   following   week,   Biden   avoided   making   references   to   France 

when discussing AUKUS (France 24, 2021b). On September 22, Macron and 

Biden resumed contact in a phone call between the leaders, which produced a 

joint   statement.   Above   all,   the   American   president   recognized   that   the 

negotiation process surrounding the submarines and defense cooperation more 

broadly would gain from more transparent communication and deliberation, 

and pledged to improve relations with both France and other European states 

in that regard. Biden and Macron also used the occasion to discuss common 

security interests of the USA and France, in particular the Indo-Pacific and the 

Sahel. In regards to the latter region, Biden promised to strengthen assistance 

to French counterterrorist action. The French president in return agreed to 

return his ambassador to Washington D.C. (U.S. Mission to France, 2021b), 

which occurred a week later, on September 29 (The Straits Times, 2021). On 

October   5,   US   Secretary   of   State   Anthony   Blinken   spoke   in   Paris   with 

Macron and Le Drian at the sidelines of an OECD event. The diplomatic crisis 

had wider implications than just US-French ties, as the Biden administration 

was engaged in a process of rebuilding trust between the two sides of the 

Atlantic   after   Trump’s   presidency.   Blinken,   who   had   spent   part   of   his 

childhood in Paris and could draw on close familial bonds to the country, was 

credited   with   having   played   a   crucial   role   in   easing   tensions   between   the 

United   States   and   France   during   the   submarine   crisis   (Crowley,   2021; 

Erlanger & Jakes, 2021). More progress in improving relations was made at 

the   G20   summit   in   Rome,   during   which   Biden   and   Macron   arranged   a 

bilateral   meeting   at   the   French   embassy.   The   former   admitted   to   having 

managed the submarine affair inelegantly, characterizing it as “clumsy” and 

describing   France   as   “an   extremely   valued   partner”.   Macron   expressed   a 

60

desire to move beyond the crisis. Among the concessions made by the United 

States were a reiterated promise to help France in its operations in the Sahel, 

as   well   as   statements   that   a   consolidated   European   defence   system,   a 

long-term ambition for Macron, could serve as “complementary” to already 

existing NATO (Vazquez, 2021b). Finally, Vice President Kamala Harris was 

received in Paris on November 9 as part of an official state visit. After the 

meeting, bilateral relations became more or less normalized (Rogers, 2021)

Notwithstanding the submarine crisis, coordination between the United 

States and France in managing the conflict in Ukraine did not always appear 

smooth. This was manifest in the interactions of the two leaders with Russian 

President Vladimir Putin, both before and after the escalation of the conflict in 

February 2022. Biden meet Putin in Geneva in June 2021, and engaged him 

multiple times throughout 2021 and early 2022 over video and phone calls 

(Belam   et   al.,   2021;   Smith,   2021).   Macron   made   a   visit   to   Moscow   on 

February 7, 2022, in another highly mediatized high-stakes meeting, and a 

follow-up phone call on February 20, four days before the start of the Special 

Military   Operation   (President   of   Russia,   2022;   Élysée,   2022a).   Biden’s 

interactions   with   Putin   were   generally   inimical,   and   the   two   leaders   held 

separate press conferences following their in-person meeting in Switzerland 

(Belam et al., 2021). Macron fared somewhat better and appeared to strike a 

less confrontational tone; the French and Russian presidents were able to hold 

a joint press conference after their February meeting. Macron also expressed 

optimism that a solution to the Ukrainian crisis would be found by working 

together (President of Russia, 2022). The attempt by Macron to engage Putin 

directly can be seen in the light of a will to distance himself from the United 

States and sustain an image of France as an independent actor in international 

affairs,   capable   of   arranging   high-level   negotiations   and   function   as   an 

intermediary   between   conflicting   parties   (Macron   made   a   state   visit   to 

61

Ukraine   immediately   after   the   talks   with   Putin)   (Borger   et   al.,   2022). 

Simultaneously, Macron appeared to speak on behalf of Europe as a whole 

when entering talks with the Russian president, showcasing his aspirations for 

a more united Europe in defense matters. Nonetheless, Macron was blatantly 

unsuccessful   in   reaching   a   meaningful   agreement   with   his   Russian 

counterpart, and the limits of his strategic autonomy were put on display as he 

scrambled   to   set   up   a   meeting   between   Biden   and   Putin   in   the   last   days 

preceding the SMO, thus tacitly acknowledging the necessity to include the 

United   States   for   any   effective   agreement   (Élysée,   2022a).   France   also 

conferred multiple times with the United States throughout the process. For 

instance, the two leaders called each other on February 9 and 15, sharing their 

experience and evaluating both leaders’ recent conversations with President 

Putin (The White House, 2022a; The White House, 2022b), while also going 

over possible countermeasures if Russia were to initiate its Special Military 

Operation.

After the onset of the Special Military Operation on February 24, 2022, 

the Biden administration opted to cut direct communication with the Russian 

government.   France,   however,   pursued   a   different   trajectory,   choosing   to 

maintain an open line of contact with Russia. This included several phone 

calls between Macron and Putin to discuss specifics related to the conflict, 

such as the peril of a nuclear accident linked to fighting near the Zaporizhzhia 

power plant, and the repercussions on global food security (Élysée, 2022b). 

There were also other nuances in the approach taken by France to the conflict, 

which sometimes contrasted with the line adopted by the United States. The 

most important of these was the controversial statement made by Macron in 

February 2024 about the possibility of sending French and other European 

troops to Ukraine. The affirmation came after a top-level meeting of European 

leaders in Paris, gathered to exchange views on further support for Ukraine. 

62

Macron   indicated   that   sending   ground   troops   to   Ukraine   was   one   of   the 

options   discussed   among   the   leaders,   and   while   no   consensus   had   been 

attained on the question, he refused to exclude the possibility. The assertion 

was   negatively   received   by   several   other   European   NATO   member   states, 

who   discarded   the   idea.   The   approach   violated   a   taboo   that   had   thus   far 

restrained NATO from engaging with the prospect of a direct intervention into 

Ukraine. That was also the case with the United States, as Joe Biden had been 

clear   that   no   American   soldiers   would   ever   be   dispatched   to   fight   against 

Russia (Bryant et al., 2024), an outlook that has remained unchanged so far in 

the conflict. Notwithstanding the provoked controversy, Macron reiterated his 

statements about possible French troops in Ukraine on several occasions over 

the   spring   of   2024,   now   visibly   identifying   the   outcome   of   the 

Russo-Ukrainian conflict with the security of Europe as a whole (France 24, 

2024b). The French leader gradually began to use the conflict as a means to 

promote   his   vision   for   a   common   European   defense   system,   increasingly 

understood to be separate from the American component in the transatlantic 

partnership.   A   year   before   Donald   Trump’s   reelection,   Macron   maintained 

that the Ukrainian conflict was primarily a “European war”, and that Europe 

as such should not depend on “the American voter” for its defense (Breeden & 

Méheut, 2024).

Over   the   course   of   2021,   Macron   continued   to   meet   with   Biden   at 

regular intervals, leading up to a state visit to the United States in December 

2022. In the joint statement released after the bilateral meeting, security issues 

featured   prominently.   NATO   was   hailed   as   a   pillar   of   their   security 

relationship, while recognition was also granted to the need for a strengthened 

European   defense   that   can   be   “complementary   to   and   interoperable   with 

NATO”. The two leaders pledged to cooperate more closely on defense, in 

particular to consult with each other on the development of cyber, intelligence 

63

and   other   high-tech   capabilities.   They   commented   that   some   progress   had 

already been made through the establishment of a US-French Defense Trade 

Security Dialogue earlier that year. Further remarks were made on four key 

areas of common interest: Ukraine, the Indo-Pacific, Africa and the Middle 

East. On the topic of Ukraine, Biden and Macron declared their unwavering 

support for the country “for as long as it takes”, and agreed to shortly provide 

Kiev with more air defense systems (U.S. Embassy Beirut, 2022). Biden made 

only one state visit to France, towards the end of his presidential mandate. His 

visit between June 5 and 9, 2024 was timed to coincide with the eighty year 

anniversary of D-Day. The joint statement that was released after the visit 

mostly repeated the same talking points from Macron’s state visit two years 

prior, including as regards the conflict in Ukraine. The statement lauded “ the 

density and breadth of the U.S.-French defense relationship”. The regional 

scope   was,   however,   wider,   and   included   specifics   on   security   issues   in 

Moldova, the Western Balkans, and South Caucasus, a section on the Western 

hemisphere, as well as details on the two countries’ stance on the Gaza War, 

which had erupted in between the two meetings (The American Presidency 

Project, 2024).

In official discourse, the United States and France favor a two-state 

solution   to   the   protracted   Israeli-Palestinian   conflict.   Both   countries   are 

nonetheless usually perceived to be de facto Israeli allies, including in the 

Gaza   War   that   began   on   October   7,   2023   (McGreal,   2023).   The   conflict, 

initially concentrated in the Gaza Strip and adjacent areas between Israel and 

Egypt, produced a wider conflagration in the Middle Eastern region that has 

included   skirmishes   along   the   Lebanese   border,   exchanges   of   missiles 

between Israel and Iran, and attacks on international shipping in the Red Sea 

by   the   Yemeni-based   Houthis.   While   Israel   so   far   has   benefited   from 

unwavering support by the USA throughout the conflict, the French approach 

64

has   been   somewhat   more   tempered.   The   distance   between   US   and   French 

attitudes to the conflict widened by the end of 2024 due to differing views on 

a potential ceasefire in Gaza and the invasion of Lebanon by Israel in October. 

The   countries   made   contrasting   comments   on   Israel’s   assassination   of 

Hezbollah   leader   Hassan   Nasrallah   in   September   2024,   with   France 

expressing concern for possible destabilization of the Israeli-Lebanese border 

area, while the US voiced approval. Moreover, France was highly critical of 

the following ground invasion of Lebanon by the IDF, whereas the United 

States were broadly understood to have offered the latter a green light for 

escalating the fighting with Hezbollah along the Blue Line and beyond. Thus, 

France has visibly sought to balance the conflicting foreign policy aims of 

safeguarding Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and supporting 

Israeli defense. In a move that may have been motivated by the significant 

French diaspora living in the Lebanon, France was the first state to send a 

top-level   official   to   Beirut   after   Israel’s   aerial   strikes   against   the   country 

(Medini, 2024). Later in October, Macron urged the international community 

to   cease   weapons   shipments   to   Israel,   and   seemed   to   criticize   the   United 

States   for   their   considerable   military   aid   packages   to   the   country,   deemed 

hypocritical in combination with American calls for a ceasefire: “those who 

provide [weapons] cannot every day call for a cease-fire alongside us and 

continue to supply them” (Francis et al., 2024).

France’s approach has been more coherent with the American one as 

regards   the   role   of   Iran   in   the   conflict.   The   two   countries,   which   possess 

nuclear   weapons   in   accordance   with   the   Non-Proliferation   Treaty,   have   a 

vested interest in preventing Iran from developing its own nuclear arsenal. 

Achieving complete Iranian compliance with the International Atomic Energy 

Agency is a stated long-time goal of both the United States and France. The 

two allies have also decried the Iranian funding of various groupings in the 

65

Middle East, which they perceive as destabilizing to the region (The American 

Presidency Project, 2024). The USA and France jointly assisted Israel during 

the 2024 clash with Iran, most notably helping shield the former country from 

missile attacks by the latter (Breeden & Specia, 2024).

France has been clear in its support for the upholding of shipping lanes 

in international waters, and with that objective in mind has committed one 

frigate to Operation Prosperity Guardian in the Red Sea, a US-led operation 

aimed at containing the Houthis (Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, 2025). 

However,   France   quickly   appeared   to   withdraw   support   for   the   American 

coalition, and it was reported that it would no longer be part of the operation 

in late 2023 (Maritime News, 2023). Instead, the French navy would operate 

on   its   own   and   prioritize   the   escort   of   French   commercial   vessels. 

Nevertheless, cooperation eventually continued in 2024, though the French 

contribution   to   Prosperity   Guardian   operated   independently   from   US 

command. The French Ministry of Armed Forces welcomed the American 

initiative for patrolling the Red Sea in an official communiqué, but insisted 

that France would retain national control over its ships so as to “guarantee our 

freedom of action”, also stating that there would be “no subordination” to the 

US (Irish & Saul, 2024; Lagneau, 2023).

US-French   military   cooperation   also   continued   in   Africa.   When 

entering office, Joe Biden inherited from Trump a small US presence in the 

Sahel   consisting   of   a   few   hundred   ground   troops,   though   these   were 

understood   to   be   crucial   for   the   maintenance   of   overall   stability   in   West 

Africa. The regional foothold of the United States deteriorated rapidly over 

the course of the Biden administration, in a development largely mirroring 

that   of   France.   The   military   presence   of   both   countries   was   dramatically 

diminished as a result of new military governments in the Sahel countries 

renouncing   their   cooperation   agreements   with   Western   states   (France   24, 

66

2024a).   France   and   the   United   States   initially   declared   to   continue   their 

common campaign against terrorism in the Sahel, insisting in late 2022 that 

counterterrorism   and   preventing   the   spread   of   disinformation   endured   as 

“joint priorities” in their Africa policy (U.S. Embassy Beirut, 2022). However, 

by   2024,   the   geopolitical   reality   of   the   region,   with   a   drastically   reduced 

Western presence and limited capacity to act on the ground, appeared to have 

caught up with the leaders, and Biden and Macron modified their policies to 

an   approach   focusing   on   humanitarian   aspects,   effectively   substituting 

diplomacy for the military as the principal policy instrument in the Sahel (The 

American   Presidency   Project,   2024).   From   an   American   perspective,   the 

operations   in   the   Sahel   appeared   peripheral   to   the   more   consequential 

conflicts   unfolding   in   the   Middle   East,   and   the   Biden   administration’s 

capacity   to   respond   to   the   security   deterioration   in   West   Africa   was 

constrained   by   involvement   in   other   conflicts,   most   notably   the   Special 

Military   Operation   in   Ukraine.   France’s   simultaneous   failure   to   defend   its 

position in the region, despite it being a major foreign policy priority, appears 

to be the result of the combined impact of overextended capacity as well as 

rising anti-French sentiment in the wider region. All while proving unable to 

adequately address their weakened position in the Sahel, it is noteworthy that 

both countries perceive their replacement with Russian mercenaries, which 

they qualify as “proxies”, as a source of concern (The American Presidency 

Project, 2024).

The Indo-Pacific dimension of the United States and France’s security 

partnership   also   continued   to   develop   over   the   course   of   Joe   Biden’s 

presidency. In April 2021, France invited the four members of the Quad to 

participate   in   its   La   Pérouse   naval   exercise,   marking   the   first   time   France 

executed   a   training   program   with   all   four   Quad   members   simultaneously 

(Rajagopalan, 2021). Nonetheless, the tensions caused by the announcement 

67

of AUKUS put a dent in efforts to synchronize military cooperation in the 

Indian and Pacific Oceans. Foreign Affairs minister Le Drian acknowledged 

that   the   American   interference   with   the   French-Australian   submarine   deal 

came at a particularly inopportune moment, as both countries were “facing 

unprecedented challenges in the Indo-Pacific” (Vazquez, 2021a), an indirect 

reference to increased Chinese blue-water maritime capabilities. US Secretary 

of State Anthony Blinken smoothed out frictions by referring to France as a 

“vital   partner”   in   the   Indo-Pacific,   and   assured   that   the   USA   desired   to 

“deepen our trans-Atlantic cooperation in the Indo-Pacific” (Vazquez, 2021a), 

a remarkable statement that stretches the scope of the transatlantic alliance far 

beyond its conventional framework centered on Europe.

Still, the approach taken by France to the Indo-Pacific is distinct from 

that of the United States. Even as France has continued to engage in joint 

naval exercises with the USA, such as in the SAMASAMA exercise in the 

Philippine Sea in 2023 and the Valiant Shield exercise in the South China Sea 

in   2024   (France   in   the   Philippines   and   in   Micronesia,   2024;   Naval   News, 

2024), France did not fully align with the American vision of bipolar great 

power competition with China in the region. While the government in Paris 

has made note of the changed strategic environment produced by the PRC’s 

more   assertive   posturing,   it   has   avoided   siding   unequivocally   with 

Washington, D.C. Instead, France insisted on the multilateral principles and 

the   rules-based   order   that   underpin   international   security,   and   referred 

repeatedly   to   the   United   Nations   Convention   on   the   Laws   of   the   Sea 

(UNCLOS) as the appropriate guideline for resolution of territorial conflicts in 

the Pacific, most notably in the South China Sea. France’s approach has been 

less bellicose and confrontational than the American, though it has insisted on 

free naval passage in the South China Sea and challenged China’s territorial 

claims there, in accordance with UNCLOS (Groupe d’études géopolitiques, 

68

2025). Moreover, despite regularly participating in joint naval exercises with 

the countries of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, France seems to lack 

enthusiasm for expanded cooperation and has resisted participation in ‘Quad 

Plus’   formats,   privileging   its   bilateral   relations   instead   (Pajon,   2021).   The 

country   has   also   increasingly   taken   on   a   role   of   representation   for   the 

European Union in the Indo-Pacific during Emmanuel Macron’s presidency, 

frequently   identifying   its   foreign   policy   goals   in   the   region   with   broader 

European   ones,   and   aiming   for   the   French   overseas   territories   to   “become 

footholds   for   EU   actions   in   the   region”   (Ministry   for   Europe   and   Foreign 

Affairs, 2021). The European Union launched its own Indo-Pacific Strategy in 

September   2021,   a   decision   that   France   had   actively   encouraged,   seeing 

greater EU involvement in the Indo-Pacific as an extension of its own strategy 

for the region (Groupe d’études géopolitiques, 2025).

69

3. Analysis of the Impact of US Policy on French Defense Policy

3.1 Defense Dilemma: US Pressures vs. French Strategic Culture

French   strategic   culture   is   a   complex   one,   much   so   due   to   the 

competing visions that have long divided its political elite as well as public 

opinion. Whereas most other European members of the North Atlantic Treaty 

Organization opted to bandwagon with the United States during the Cold War 

and in the post-1991 era, tacitly accepting the preeminence of the latter within 

the alliance, France early on struck out on a different path that was conducive 

to greater strategic ambiguity. At the heart of the French dilemma are two 

contradictory considerations of what role it should occupy in its postcolonial 

period. On the one hand, France has been a heavyweight member of NATO 

and   has   cultivated   close   political,   economic   and   diplomatic   ties   with   the 

United States since long before the emergence of the alliance. This would 

make the country a major participant in the transatlantic partnership. On the 

other hand, there has been a strong political undercurrent in French society 

since the 1950s favoring greater autonomy from the United States (and other 

great powers). This has materialized in military relations that have been less 

intimate than what the otherwise close political affiliation between the two 

countries would suggest.

The Atlanticist vision of France

The Atlanticist tradition, favoring close-knit security cooperation with 

the   United   States,   springs   from   the   political   reality   of   a   divided   post-war 

Europe, in which the prospect of an attack by the USSR was perceived as an 

existential   threat.   For   most   of   the   Cold   War,   the   fault   lines   ran   through 

Germany, meaning that Soviet aggression was not such a distant specter for 

70

French policymakers - a mere few hundred kilometers separated the French 

Occupation Zone in Germany, as well as the French mainland itself, from the 

territory of the opposing bloc (Lieven, 2024). A France that was militarily 

weakened after the Second World War, was losing much of its geostrategic 

significance due to progressive loss of overseas colonies, and was unable to 

withstand   by   itself   the   pressures   of   a   rising   Soviet   Union,   was   ultimately 

forced to turn to the United States for backup. It can also be argued that the 

Atlanticist   faction   in   French   politics   grounds   its   worldview   in   a   more 

foundational perception of the United States as a natural partner that shares 

the same democratic values and objectives.

Despite   France   continuously   remaining   a   NATO   member,   the 

Atlanticist current suffered somewhat during the Cold War, especially after 

France acquired nuclear capabilities, which gave the opposing ‘sovereigntist’ 

movement   much   credibility.   Centrist   political   parties   as   well   as 

non-communist   politicians   of   the   left   were   initially   strongly   against   De 

Gaulle’s monumental decision in 1966 and wished to rejoin NATO. Over the 

1970s,   a   shift   occurred,   with   the   left   gradually   converging   towards   the 

Gaullist line, which was mostly kept intact under the presidency of socialist 

François   Mitterrand,   starting   in   1981.   Consequently,   there   was   a   certain 

blurring of the previously clear-cut left-right division on the NATO question 

in French politics, and the Atlanticist vision has not fully prevailed on the 

center-left since then (Boniface, 2021). Nevertheless, after 1991, Atlanticism 

again gained in prominence as France began a policy of realignment with the 

USA.   Though   the   rhetoric   of   Gaullism   never   disappeared   from   official 

political discourse, the transatlantic ideology had de facto entered the realm of 

mainstream politics and had become the centerpiece of the country’s defense 

strategy (Schmitt, 2017). Atlanticists rejected the Gaullist considerations of 

sovereignty and complete independence in foreign policy decisions. In their 

71

view, American leadership was central to the West’s victory in the Cold War, 

which was rendered possible by the decision of most Western countries to 

follow the lead of the United States, often formulating policy in lockstep with 

Washington, D.C. From this perspective, the nonconformist aspirations of De 

Gaulle   and   most   of   his   successors   are   understood   to   have   been 

counterproductive to the national interests of France (Boniface, 2021).

Contemporary, post-Cold War Atlanticism still perceives the USA as a 

natural leader of the West, which France ought to collaborate closely with. Its 

proponents’ strategic vision for the country has, however, undergone some 

changes since 1991. From their perspective, France is no longer facing an 

ideological menace in the form of a communist USSR, but a combined threat 

from a resurrected, revisionist Russia, an increasingly assertive China, and 

Islamic terrorism from the Middle East. Thus, to some extent, the Atlanticist 

movement in France can be said to have taken a civilizational, ‘Occidentalist’ 

turn,   where   Western   civilization,   embodied   through   ideals   of   democracy, 

individualism   and   liberalism,   is   pitted   against   authoritarian   rivals.   It   also 

mirrors the increased influence of neo-Conservatives in the United States in 

the   2000s,   who   campaigned   for   a   more   aggressive   foreign   policy   in   the 

non-Western world. The presidency of Nicolas Sarkozy (2007-2012) can be 

seen   against   this   background,   including   the   decision   to   rejoin   NATO’s 

integrated central command in 2009 and the UN-sanctioned intervention in 

Libya   in   2011   (Boniface,   2021).   He   justified   his   policies   by   arguing   that 

France and the United States belong to the same Western family, underscoring 

that the two countries “share a common history and values” (Élysée, 2012).  

Likewise,   successor   François   Hollande’s   (2012-2017)   involvement   in   the 

Syrian Civil War can be understood as derived from the same Atlanticist vein. 

The   degree   of   concord   and   strategic   unity   with   the   United   States   that   is 

nurtured by French Atlanticists should nevertheless not be overemphasized. 

72

For instance, Sarkozy adopted a rather neutral stance in the Russo-Georgian 

conflict of 2008 and acted as a mediator between the two states, while the 

USA publicly condemned Russia (Boniface, 2021). Earlier that same year, 

France and the United States had also disagreed on the prospect of Georgian 

and   Ukrainian   NATO   membership,   with   France   opting   to   oppose   the   US 

initiative to expand the alliance eastwards.

There is no clear division among parties in the French political system 

as regards the question of NATO and the strategic path to be followed by 

France. The position of parties has been known to fluctuate, and individual 

politicians have highly contrasting views on the issue, which can sometimes 

deviate from the official course adopted by the party with which they are 

affiliated. In general terms, centrist parties are the staunchest defenders of 

transatlantic cooperation in contemporary France. This includes most notably 

Les Républicains (The Republicans, LR, formerly known as UMP and RPR), 

one of two parties that used to dominate French politics for decades along 

with the competing Parti Socialiste (Socialist Party, PS). The Republicans 

were   previously   identified   with   a   purely   Gaullist   line,   but   appear   to   have 

modified their approach in recent years due to increasing competition from 

far-right presidential candidates (the last time LR won a presidential election 

was in 2007). Though the decision by Sarkozy in 2009 to rejoin NATO’s 

integrated command structure was highly controversial within the party, their 

official program now rejects the notion of withdrawing from it once more. 

Instead,   it   proposes   to   build   a   stronger   European   defense,   with   massive 

investments to boost the homegrown French and European defense industry, 

thus creating a strong “European pillar” within NATO. There is thus a strong 

Gaullist   undercurrent   that   is   still   discernible   in   LR,   but   the   continued 

importance of working with “our American allies” is nonetheless underscored. 

The party also suggests increasing defence spending across NATO to 3% of 

73

GDP (Les Républicains, 2024), echoing American demands of greater burden 

sharing. The LR candidate for the 2022 presidential election, Valérie Pécresse, 

affirmed her support for NATO, all while maintaining that “alliance does not 

signify allegiance” (Cantié, 2022).

The   Socialist   Party   has   evolved   according   to   a   similar   trend,   facing 

comparable pressure from an emerging far-left movement. The PS candidate 

for the same election, Anne Hidalgo, considered the United States and France 

as “unwavering allies” with “a common history”, but highlighted the need to 

strengthen the European component of the organization. President Emmanuel 

Macron’s party Renaissance (formerly known as La République en marche !), 

while clearly also under the influence of the Gaullist tradition, has opted to 

promote a continued French presence in NATO, renouncing the possibility of 

leaving the alliance (Cantié, 2022).

Public   opinion   research   conducted   annually   by   NATO   since   2019 

indicates that the organization enjoys rather high support among the French 

population. The questionnaire is slightly modified from year to year, but some 

key aspects can be tracked over time. To the question ‘How important do you 

consider the relationship between North America and Europe in dealing with 

security challenges today?’, 73% and 72% of French respondents answered 

with   ‘Very   important’   or   ‘Somewhat   important’   in   2019   and   2021, 

respectively. The 2024 survey saw a similarly formulated question: ‘Do you 

think   France   is   more   safe   as   a   result   of   the   cooperation   between   North 

American   and   European   NATO   nations?’,   to   which   50%   responded 

positively.   Additionally,   in   the   same   survey   66%   of   the   French   public 

perceived   NATO   as   important   to   the   “future   security”   of   France   (NATO, 

2020;   NATO   Public   Diplomacy   Division,   2022,   NATO   Public   Diplomacy 

Division,   2024b).   There   thus   appears   to   be   significant   approval   of   the 

transatlantic partnership between France and the United States. However, it 

74

should be noted that the French data tend to be at the lower end of the range 

for alliance members. Despite a majority of over 70% endorsing NATO in the 

2019   and   2021   surveys,   these   numbers   were   some   of   the   lowest   in   the 

organization and considerably below the average value of 81%. In fact, only 

three member  states (Montenegro, Slovakia  and  Bulgaria) registered  lower 

support   for   NATO   in   2021.   Moreover,   approximately   half   the   French 

population considers that French NATO membership makes it less likely that 

France will experience foreign aggression (54% in 2019, 49% in 2021, 57% in 

2024), highlighting that the organization is generally perceived as useful. Still, 

these scores are once more among the lowest in the alliance, with France 

displaying the fourth lowest value in 2021 after the USA, Montenegro and 

Slovakia. There is nonetheless an emerging trend of increasing endorsement 

of French membership in the organization. While only 50% of respondents in 

2019   and   2021   declared   that   they   would   vote   to   remain   in   NATO   if   a 

referendum was held, this score had increased to 61% by 2024 (NATO, 2020; 

NATO Public Diplomacy Division, 2022; NATO Public Diplomacy Division, 

2024b), a development that can be seen in light of the escalation of tensions in 

Ukraine since 2022 (Marcadé, 2022).

The Gaullist vision of France

Just like the Atlanticist vision, the Gaullist (or sovereigntist) tradition in 

French political life takes its origins in the immediate post-war years, as the 

French   leadership   began   to   react   to   the   dominating   position   of   the   United 

States   in   the   West   and   beyond.   France   was   undergoing   a   process   of 

decolonization in the 1950s and early 1960s, which the United States helped 

catalyze,   to   great   dismay   of   the   French.   The   1956   Suez   Crisis   proved 

humiliating to France, as not only the Soviet Union but also the United States 

75

actively   opposed   French   intervention   in   Egypt,   effectively   sapping   trust 

between the USA and France. Though France would remain safely within the 

Western camp throughout the whole Cold War, this incident fueled a desire to 

seek a more neutral position in the international system, the primary means to 

which was the country’s own nuclear weapons program. Ultimately, under the 

oversight of President Charles de Gaulle, the French nuclear program was 

conceived   as   a   deterrent   not   against   the   Soviet   bloc,   but   as   a   universal 

deterrent against all other states (Schmitt, 2017). The implementation of the 

policy was also aided by the onset of the détente decade between the Western 

and Socialist blocs, making the imminent threat from the USSR and the need 

for   reliance   on   US   deterrence   less   salient   (Boniface,   2021).   With   the 

subsequent withdrawal from NATO’s integrated command structure in 1966, 

the singularity of French strategic autonomy was a reality, creating a political 

movement in French society that would prove extremely long-lived. (Schmitt, 

2017).

The Gaullist approach to French defense thus centers on the notion of 

the nation achieving strategic autonomy, above all from the United States. It 

has   been   expressed   in   various   ways   over   the   years,   ranging   from   a   soft 

skepticism   to   NATO   to   an   outspoken   desire   of   leaving   the   alliance 

permanently. Since the end of the Cold War, sovereigntists have increasingly 

come to define their opposition to Atlanticism not as a rejection of partnership 

with the United States per se, but as an objection towards the organizational 

characteristics of NATO specifically (Schmitt, 2017). Cooperation with the 

USA should be allowed to continue, but the unequal platform of the North 

Atlantic Alliance should be reformed or dismantled. 

In general terms, the French far right is anti-Atlanticist and over time 

has best personified the Gaullist tradition on the matter, while the left and far 

left also tend to put on view a defiant stance. The largest far-right party, and 

76

currently   largest   single   party   in   the   French   National   Assembly,   is 

Rassemblement   National   (National   Rally,   RN,   formerly   known   as   Front 

National), whose leading figure since the early 2010s has been Marine Le 

Pen. The party leader has frequently referenced Charles de Gaulle and his 

sense of patriotism as a source of inspiration for her own politics (Lichfield, 

2021). Le Pen has vocally opposed further integration of France with other 

countries,   both   within   the   framework   of   NATO   and   the   European   Union. 

Ahead of the 2022 presidential election, in which she advanced to the second 

round and received 41% of votes, she declared that if elected, she would once 

more withdraw the country from NATO’s central command, emulating De 

Gaulle. She nonetheless expressed support for the Article 5 commitment of 

the North Atlantic Treaty, vowing to honor it if called upon (The New York 

Times,   2022;   France   24,   2022).   Importantly,   as   opposed   to   the   centrist 

NATO-skeptics,   National   Rally   rejects   the   idea   of   building   a   European 

defense   system,   being   long-standing   Eurosceptics.   RN   perceive   European 

integration as another constraint on the strategic autonomy pursued by France. 

In this respect, Le Pen has taken a dim view of the close Franco-German 

partnership under Emmanuel Macron’s and Angela Merkel’s leadership, and 

suggested to end joint military projects between the two nations. The RN has 

also advocated for improved relations with Russia, including after the onset of 

the   SMO   (France   24,   2022).   This   may   be   seen   both   as   an   expression   of 

ideological proximity to more conservative Russian politics, and as a means of 

balancing against the United States.

Similar views on NATO have been voiced by Éric Zemmour, founder 

of far-right political party Reconquête (Reconquest), which places to the right 

of National Rally on the political spectrum. Zemmour has emerged as a vocal 

critic of NATO enlargement to Eastern Europe, maintaining that NATO was 

“responsible” for the eruption of armed conflict in Ukraine in 2014 and 2022. 

77

Like Le Pen, he has suggested a warming up of relations with Russia. The 

Reconquest Party’s defense program largely concords with that of National 

Rally   -   it   is   negatively   disposed   to   consolidation   of   European   defense 

initiatives,   promotes   a   departure   from   the   integrated   central   command   of 

NATO, and seeks to refocus expenditure on purely French military structures. 

Zemmour, however, goes further than Le Pen in that he has proposed a drastic 

augmentation of defense budgets for the country, stating in 2022 that France’s 

military   budget   should   be   increased   from   a   current   41   billion   euros   to   70 

billion euros by the end of the decade. Specifically, the party leader suggested 

constructing a second aircraft carrier and “densifying” the national production 

of military equipment, while warning against the purchase of weapons from 

the United States (Loaëc, 2022).

Hostility to NATO also permeates the French far-left parties, including 

La France Insoumise (France Unbowed, LFI), which in recent years has been 

at the forefront of a series of broad left-wing electoral alliances in the French 

Parliament. Unlike the far-right parties of Le Pen and Zemmour, the LFI have 

distanced themselves from calls of rearmament and strengthening of national 

defense, urging instead to give a more prominent role to the United Nations 

Security Council for the resolution of military conflicts. The party leader since 

2016, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, has proposed on several occasions that France 

should leave NATO entirely, viewing the alliance as useless (France Info, 

2022). He has also echoed Zemmour’s talking points on the role of NATO in 

fomenting   a   crisis   in   Ukraine,   and   promoted   a   new   vision   of   strategic 

“non-alignment” for France (Europe 1, 2022). In 2022, the LFI presented a 

white paper that proposed to leave NATO, outlining possible countermeasures 

to sanctions from the United States that could potentially follow (La France 

Insoumise, 2022). The 2022 party program proposed to immediately withdraw 

from the central command, and then progressively from the whole alliance. 

78

However, by 2024, the party appeared to have softened its stance on NATO, 

visibly   impacted   by   the   protracted   conflict   in   Ukraine   (Bourgery-Gonse, 

2024).

Thus, the Gaullist tradition assumes diverse forms in modern France. 

While   some   politicians   call   for   a   partial   or   complete   withdrawal   from   the 

transatlantic   alliance   in   favor   of   a   military   strategy   entirely   centered   on 

national defense, there is also an influential interpretation of Gaullism that 

promotes a reorientation of security planning away from the United States, 

towards a collective European approach. The latter variant, which is frowned 

upon by the French far right, is now fully embraced by the centrist, previously 

mainstream political parties, even as they declare their support for continued 

presence in NATO. Most notably, it is the line which has been supported by 

President Emmanuel Macron since entering office in 2017.

Emmanuel Macron as a singular factor in the equation

Macron is a self-declared Gaullist in a broad sense, and perceives his 

politics at both the domestic and international levels to be consistent with the 

ideals embodied by Charles de Gaulle (Lichfield, 2021). In the dichotomy of 

Atlanticism   and   Sovereigntism,   Macron   has   emerged   as   a   somewhat 

ambiguous case, at different times displaying different characteristics of both 

political traditions. The leader, though on occasion having bitterly criticized 

the alliance, has never proposed to withdraw from it, and has been clear about 

the responsibilities conferred on his country by Article 5. This would place 

him firmly within the Atlanticist camp. Nonetheless, Macron has not ceased to 

advocate for reduced dependence on the United States, both for France and for 

the European continent as a whole.

79

The so-called Sorbonne speech delivered by Emmanuel Macron at a 

university in Paris in September 2017 was indicative of the foreign policy 

trajectory he intended to develop. Labeled as a “new initiative for Europe”, 

the allocution placed French security interests in a context of wider European 

security interests. Macron declared that his objective is to ensure “Europe’s 

autonomous operating capabilities, in complement to NATO”, and to achieve 

that   aim   proposed   a   number   of   initiatives,   such   as   the   activation   of   a 

Permanent   Structured   Cooperation   (PESCO)   in   the   EU,   the   creation   of   a 

European   Defence   Fund,   the   establishment   of   a   European   Intelligence 

Academy, and organize a European joint intervention force. Above all, what 

the   EU   and   France   needed   was   a   common   strategic   culture   that   would 

facilitate coordination in defense matters (Élysée, 2017). With the exception 

of PESCO, which was developed the same year and counts dozens of joint 

military   projects   among   EU   countries,   and   in   which   France   figures 

prominently   (European   Defence   Agency,   2025),   none   of   the   envisioned 

blueprints   for   a   united   European   defense   system   have   been   realized.   The 

vision   of   a   more   autonomous   Europe   capable   of   meeting   its   own   security 

needs   would   nevertheless   prove   a   persistent   topic   throughout   Macron’s 

presidency.

This singular vision is not novel per se, and is present in the rhetoric of 

other   centrist   parties   and   politicians,   but   has   rarely   been   argued   for   more 

forcefully than by Macron. It can be seen as part of a longer tradition that 

inscribes the defense policy of France within a European collective policy, 

effectively   fusing   the   French   national   interest   with   a   purported   ‘European 

national   interest’.   There   is   a   Gaullist   aspect   to   this   conceptualization,   as 

Charles De Gaulle was the originator of the notion of ‘Europe Puissance’ in 

the 1960s, the idea of a united Europe that could exist independently between 

the two superpowers of the USA and USSR. De Gaulle allegedly perceived 

80

the   European   Economic   Community,   then   composed   of   the   Inner   Six,   as 

sufficient to propel France back to the preeminent status that it had lost after 

the   defeat   of   Napoleon   I   in   1815.   The   other   European   states   were   thus 

perceived as a useful instrument, which France could wield at its behest to 

achieve   its   own   national   objectives   (Lefebvre,   2021;   Foreign   Policy 

Association, 2025). The strategic considerations of De Gaulle are still topical. 

They are grounded in the realization that France on its own does not possess 

the political, economic and military wherewithal to exercise a dominant role 

in the international system. As part of a larger Europe where France would be 

‘first among equals’, however, the country would again be able to assert itself 

on par with the United States and other great powers. It is this idea of ‘Europe 

Puissance’ that Emmanuel Macron could be said to attempt to resurrect. 

Some policy decisions made over the course of Macron’s time in office 

can   be   interpreted   as   a   continuation   of   this   particular   Gaullist   line.   For 

instance,   Macron’s   attempts   to   lead   independent   negotiations   with   Russia 

prior to and after the SMO is reminiscent of De Gaulle’s call for a Europe 

“from   the   Atlantic   to   the   Urals”   (Lieven,   2024).   De   Gaulle   was   a 

conservative,   and   thus   had   little   consideration   for   Marxist   ideology. 

(Boniface,   2021).   Similarly,   Macron   is   positioned   far   to   the   left   on   the 

political   spectrum   of   Russian   President   Vladimir   Putin.   The   reaching   out 

should therefore be seen more as a stratagem to distance the USA and increase 

France’s   standing   internationally.   The   approach   adopted   by   Macron   in   the 

later   stages   of   the   Ukrainian   conflict,   which   has   featured   more   outspoken 

support for the Ukrainian side, could also be understood as a reaction to US 

developments. After the landslide victories in the primaries of early 2024, it 

became   clear   that   Donald   Trump   would   most   likely   be   the   Republican 

candidate at the 2024 US presidential election, creating the realistic prospect 

of a lessened American support for the Ukrainian war effort by the end of that 

81

year.   However,   it   could   also   be   argued   that   Macron’s   gradually   stronger 

support for Ukraine is motivated by domestic considerations and the rise in 

popularity of the far right. Taking a firmer stance for Ukraine and against 

Russia could be an attempt to damage the reputation of RN, since Le Pen was 

formerly perceived as close to Putin (Lieven, 2024).

In line with the intensification of the Special Military Operation and 

wavering of the White House in its funding of Ukraine in late 2023 and early 

2024, Emmanuel Macron doubled down in his discourse on an autonomous 

Europe   in   defense   matters.   His   more   proactive   stance   most   notably   found 

expression in open speculation about the transfer of European combat troops 

to Ukraine (Breeden & Méheut, 2024), but was also apparent in his attempts 

to rally other European leaders for the cause. In a state visit to Sweden in 

January 2024, Macron openly proclaimed that “part of out vital interests have 

a   European   dimension”,   and   that   France   in   that   regard   has   a   “special 

responsibility” (Fayet, 2024). Returning to the Sorbonne University in April 

2024,   Macron   reiterated   many   of   the   same   points   stated   in   the   speech 

delivered   seven   years   earlier,   highlighting   the   consistency   of   his   strategic 

vision. In terms of security issues, he argued, Europe and France “cannot be 

addressed separately” (Élysée, 2024).

3.2 Summary of the findings

French   and   American   strategic   culture   alike   underwent   noteworthy 

changes in the studied period. The United States’ security strategy was highly 

volatile, partly so due to the change of administrations in 2021, while French 

defense   policy   was   overall   characterized   by   more   consistency,   albeit   not 

without unexpected twists and turns. US foreign policy responded largely to 

its own internal motivations grounded in its national identity and the high 

82

level of political polarization occurring in recent years, as well as to the course 

of action of a select number of states, foremost of which were Russia, China 

and Israel. France, though an important ally, does not appear to have had a 

decisive impact on the formulation of American policy, even in spheres where 

the two countries worked closely together to achieve shared goals. The same, 

however, can not be said the other way around - it is clear that French defense 

policy in a large number of cases has oriented itself on the actions of the 

United States, or to some degree or other has been formulated as a reaction to 

political developments on the other side of the Atlantic.

US-French military cooperation throughout the period has spanned a 

number of fields and theaters of operation. French forces have been actively 

engaged alongside their American colleagues in counterterrorist campaigns in 

Afghanistan, Syria, the Sahel and the Red Sea, in military exercises within the 

North Atlantic framework as well as outside of it, such as in the Indo-Pacific, 

and   have   provided   large-scale   financial,   logistical   and   material   support   to 

third-party   countries   outside   NATO   with   which   both   countries   have   close 

political ties, most notably Ukraine and Israel.

In   most   operations,   French   forces   played   a   supportive,   though   not 

always subordinate, role to a larger mission or strategic aim pursued by the 

USA. Such was the case in Afghanistan, where French presence was made 

possible by the US twenty-year occupation of the country, in Syria, where 

France to a great extent relied on US efforts to successfully conduct its policy 

of rollback towards the Islamic State, and in the waters off the Yemeni coast, 

where   the   United   States   has   taken   the   main   initiative   in   ensuring   the   free 

passage of commercial vessels. France also assisted Israel to a lesser extent 

than the United States, delivering significantly fewer weapons and equipment, 

as well as assuming a less prominent role in interactions with Iran. A notable 

exception where the roles to some extent appear to be inverted is the mission 

83

in the Sahel, where French investment and troops clearly outnumbered those 

of the American partner. It should, however, be taken into account that West 

Africa   was   of   low   strategic   priority   for   both   the   Trump   and   Biden 

administrations, and that there was never any pronounced conflict of interest 

between France and the United States in the Sahel, with the US objectives for 

the   region   largely   overlapping   with   those   of   France.   Thus,   in   most   cases 

France acted as a junior partner to the USA in the two countries’ joint military 

engagements, and French behavior internationally can often be described as 

bandwagoning, an implicit acknowledgement of French dependence on the 

United States. A clear example of that was Emmanuel Macron’s separate line 

of negotiations with Russian President Vladimir Putin in the weeks preceding 

the start of the SMO - the French effort was partly aimed at setting up a 

summit between Joe Biden and Putin, underscoring France’s insufficiency in 

dealing with Russia on equal terms. However, the perception of France as a 

mere bandwagon or subordinate partner to the USA needs to be nuanced.

The United States can be said to have influenced France in multiple 

ways, though the extent of the influence has its limitations. First, the United 

States has affected France through the alteration of its strategic visions and 

priorities. There is clearly a paradigmatic change unfolding in the American 

worldview,   with   the   long-expected   ‘pivot   to   Asia’   finally   gathering 

momentum under the Trump and Biden administrations. This has relegated 

Europe,   and   by   implication   France   as   well,   to   a   second   place   in   the   US 

ranking   of   priorities.   At   the   same   time,   France   has   since   the   late   2000s 

become reintegrated into the transatlantic framework to a much greater degree 

than before, with Atlanticist currents in French political life gaining traction in 

the years that preceded the Asian pivot of 2017 onwards. There has manifestly 

been an American attempt to entangle its European allies in its growing great 

power competition with China, notably by using the North Atlantic platform 

84

to rally support, as seen by the increasingly preponderant attention devoted to 

the PRC in NATO discourse, a tendency that began under Donald Trump’s 

first presidency. While this strategy has given mixed results so far, France has 

been more receptive to it than most European partners, at least in part because 

the country possesses significant overseas territories in the Indian and Pacific 

Oceans. In France, the ‘pivot to Asia’ thus manifested itself with a similar 

trend, as can be observed by the prompt adoption of the new US geopolitical 

concept of the ‘Indo-Pacific’, and the release of its own official Indo-Pacific 

strategy. The French worldview is consequently to some extent informed by 

the   American,   most   plainly   evidenced   by   the   identification   of   China   as   a 

challenger to the status quo and established order in the region. Still, there was 

no full alignment with US interests in the area due to French reservations, 

which will be discussed below.

Second, the USA influenced France indirectly through its approach to 

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Considering the weight of NATO in 

framing   the   defense   relations   between   the   United   States   and   its   European 

allies,   including   France,   any   examination   of   US-French   relations   in   the 

military domain will necessarily put emphasis on the transatlantic partnership 

as an instrument that conveyed policy change. The USA underwent a major 

overhaul of its policy towards the alliance, with ripple effects on the other 

members. Under the leadership of Donald Trump, the main axis of the new 

American NATO policy was the notion of collective burden sharing, with 

virulent   criticism   of   perceived   European   free   riders.   However,   budget 

questions per se were probably the aspect of US policy that had the least effect 

on   French   defense   policy   throughout   the   period.   At   the   beginning   of   the 

study’s timeframe, France was already quite close to the target rate of 2% of 

GDP, and subsequent French increases of the defense budget over the period 

are in the 0.1-0.2% range (NATO Public Diplomacy Division, 2024a). These 

85

fluctuations are rather negligible compared to those of other NATO member 

states, where the impact of US pressure was ostensibly more strongly felt. 

Several considerations help explain the limited French response in terms of 

defense expenditure. First, France is by itself already continental Europe’s 

strongest state in terms of military power (excluding Russia and Ukraine). The 

asymmetry   in   spending   between   the   United   States   and   the   other   NATO 

members was essentially due to the large deficit in other states’ spending, and 

the Trumpian criticism could therefore be said to have been mostly addressed 

to   other   European   countries.   Second,   France’s   long-standing   insistence   on 

‘autonomy’,   which   has   among   other   things   translated   into   an   independent 

nuclear weapons program, by extension also comprises autonomy vis-a-vis 

NATO, despite an intensification of French participation in the organization in 

the   2010s.   This   autonomy   gives   France   some   leverage   to   resist   potential 

pressures emanating from the White House. Lastly, in relation to the other 

European countries in the transatlantic alliance, France is to a much greater 

degree self-reliant in the domain of security, in particular compared to smaller 

European states (e.g. Belgium), but also larger ones (e.g. Germany), that rely 

much more on the United States for their national security. With a growing 

perception   in   the   alliance   of   Russia   as   the   main   strategic   competitor   and 

external threat, France’s geographic location in Western Europe also grants it 

some   advantages   that   deflate   the   Russian   threat   perception   promoted   by 

Donald Trump.

A more compelling thought is the degree to which Emmanuel Macron 

could   actually   be   said   to   concur   with   the   general   philosophy   of   the   new 

approach to NATO ushered in by the Trump administration. As opposed to 

other members, who responded with perplexity or objections, it appears that 

France   rather   welcomed   the   American   demands   for   increased   military 

expenditure.   A   Europe   that   collectively   spends   more   on   defense   could 

86

facilitate   the   emergence   of   a   clearer   ‘European   pillar’   in   NATO   by 

rebalancing the disequilibrium in military might between the two sides of the 

Atlantic, and could in the longer-term perspective also lay the ground for a 

possible European defense system that operates independently of the United 

States, a long-standing ambition of Emmanuel Macron. At any rate, it would 

in theory allow Macron’s France to leverage to a greater extent the collective 

military power of a united Europe. The relative antipathy exhibited by Macron 

towards Trump in the later stages of the latter’s mandate must thus be caused 

by other factors. To all appearances Macron by and large took issue with 

Donald   Trump’s   general   animosity   towards   multilateral   institutions   and 

practices, considering that multilateralism is a cornerstone of France’s foreign 

policy and wider worldview. This also extends to the French foreign policy, 

notwithstanding   whether   it   is   interpreted   through   the   prism   of   Atlanticism 

(that is, personified as NATO) or sovereigntism (in which the ‘Europeanist’ 

interpretation   of   autonomy   is   gaining   clout).   Trump’s   flouting   of 

intergovernmental   institutions   and   the   disdainful   rhetoric   employed   when 

commenting on allies was clearly not to France’s liking. The spontaneity and 

ad hoc approaches sometimes used by Trump also caused visible irritation 

with Macron, and fostered the feeling that France was not valued enough as a 

strategic partner. A clear example of that was the US decision to pull out its 

troops from Northeast Syria in 2019, effectively undermining efforts by an 

international coalition to contain ISIS, and provoking caustic comments by 

Macron on the state of their alliance.

Third,   the   drastic   variations   in   US   foreign   policy,   especially   what 

concerns NATO, translated into specific political dynamics in France. The 

fluctuations in US policy that resulted from the change in both president and 

governing   party   in   2017   and   2021   were   far   more   profound   than   what   is 

common in the United States. The contrasts between the Trump and Biden 

87

administrations were epitomized by the sharp transformations of discourse on 

NATO that occurred over the period. These developments in turn activated 

different movements in French political life and led to policy adjustments. 

Thus,   beyond   systemic   factors,   domestic   factors   in   the   shape   of   opposed 

political   currents   in   French   society   also   impacted   on   the   final   policies 

formulated at the Élysée Palace. 

Since   the   late   2000s,   France   had   modified   its   stance   in   relation   to 

NATO and had embraced close cooperation with partners in the alliance. The 

main centrist parties, PS and LR, which represent the political forces in France 

that   are   the   most   favorably   disposed   to   the   transatlantic   alliance,   arguably 

became   more   Atlanticist   than   they   had   been   previously,   beginning   to 

underscore the desirability of greater French participation in the organization, 

and discarding past talking points about the benefits of remaining outside the 

integrated   central   command.   These   parties   have   thus   placed   themselves   in 

opposition to the antagonistic approach of Trump, and are politically much 

closer to the line adopted by Joe Biden. Curiously, these traditional, more 

Atlanticist   parties   have   lost   ground   in   recent   national   elections,   with   the 

Socialist Party collapsing entirely. There has been considerable polarization of 

the   political   landscape,   with   voters   being   drawn   to   far-left   and   far-right 

parties,   which   hold   anti-Atlanticist   positions.   Consequently,   Emmanuel 

Macron’s   centrist   Renaissance   Party   has   emerged   as   the   foremost 

representative of the pro-NATO section in French politics, despite there being 

significant Gaullist undercurrents in that party as well.

There   thus   appears   to   have   been   a   general   weakening   of   Atlanticist 

ideology in French politics to the benefit of the Gaullist tradition. It is notable 

that politicians with hardcore, conservative interpretations of Gaullism, such 

as   Marine   Le   Pen   and   Éric   Zemmour,   who   reject   both   transatlantic   and 

European defense cooperation in favor of a purely nationalist defense strategy, 

88

have strengthened their standing, almost to the point of becoming mainstream 

candidates   in   elections.   However,   it   is   difficult   to   attribute   this   rise   to   a 

possible influence from Donald Trump with any certainty. The increase in the 

popularity of the far right is a global trend that is observed across many states, 

and French voters tend to be far more concerned with domestic issues such as 

the economy and migration that with foreign policy. It is likewise problematic 

to advance the hypothesis that Trump’s NATO policy energized sovereigntist 

tendencies among the far right. While this may be so, it should be noted that 

the members of National Rally, the largest far-right party in France, have been 

consistently   Gaullist   and   Eurosceptic   for   decades,   making   any   positive 

affirmations the product of guesswork.

Whether there is a causal link or not between the election of Donald 

Trump   and   the   surge   in   popularity   of   Le   Pen,   it   is   clear   that   the   two   are 

ideologically   close,   sharing   a   preference   for   a   more   isolationist   policy, 

whether in defense, trade or elsewhere. Again, this implies that Macron stands 

in opposition to both Trump and the French far right, as a relatively more 

Atlanticist   politician.   The   most   interesting   finding   is   therefore   that   the 

approach taken by Emmanuel Macron to French defense policy is nevertheless 

motivated by strong Gaullist predispositions. What is more, the strength with 

which these Gaullist inclinations are assumed seems to vary in accordance 

with   the   White   House’s   policy   towards   NATO.   When   the   United   States 

castigated   the   alliance   under   Trump,   France   tended   to   promote   greater 

European strategic autonomy from the USA. When the United States renewed 

their commitments to NATO under Biden, France followed suit and appeared 

to reaffirm the importance of the transatlantic partnership with the USA.

Upon   entering   office,   Emmanuel   Macron   began   to   vividly   argue   in 

favor   of   a   stronger   European   defense,   one   in   which   France   would   play   a 

primary role, all while permitting himself bouts of outspoken criticism of the 

89

transatlantic alliance. His criticism was generally formulated more delicately 

than   that   of   Trump.   The   climate   created   by   Trump’s   verbal   onslaught   on 

NATO   made   it   possible   to   voice   more   unconventional   views   on   the 

organization than what had been the case previously, when NATO was tacitly 

accepted   as   a   staple   in   international   life   not   to   be   questioned.   Emmanuel 

Macron   manifestly   seized   this   occasion,   as   exemplified   by   his   Sorbonne 

speech and other public declarations of the same sort. However, Trump’s own 

view of NATO softened somewhat over the course of his first mandate, which 

over time created some disparity in their outlooks. The lowest point in the 

French president’s attitude to NATO was in late 2019, when he characterized 

the   alliance   as   suffering   from   “brain   death”,   which   generated   a   negative 

reaction from Trump himself. This can be interpreted as a case where Macron 

miscalculated   and   overstepped   the   limits   of   acceptable   criticism   of   the 

transatlantic   alliance,   as   seen   from   the   United   States.   He   subsequently 

moderated his wording, and by the arrival of Joe Biden in the White House in 

2021 had adopted a far more reconciliatory style, in which the importance of 

cooperation with American and other NATO allies was accentuated. Macron 

would yet again begin to reemphasize the need to develop closer defense ties 

among European countries throughout 2024, in parallel with Donald Trump 

clinching a string of victories in the Republican primaries and emerging as the 

likely candidate for the Republicans at the 2024 US presidential election. The 

prospect of the isolationist and NATO-sceptic Trump being reelected to the 

White House, which appeared increasingly probable over the course of 2024, 

and even more so as Joe Biden’s public approval was in conspicuous decline, 

seems to have fueled Emmanuel Macron’s Gaullist instincts. Thus, French 

commitment   to   NATO   waxed   and   waned   with   American   declared 

commitment.

90

The   particular   branch   of   Gaullism   Macron   adheres   to   is   the   softer 

variant, which reevaluates French strategic autonomy as ‘European strategic 

autonomy’, above all from the United States. This interpretation of French 

autonomy has always been present since the days of De Gaulle, for example 

enjoying a brief revival under Jacques Chirac in the 1990s, but it is clear that 

it   has   become   much   more   influential   under   the   leadership   of   Emmanuel 

Macron, despite Macron regularly professing his unswerving commitment to 

NATO. France can thus be understood to attempt to ‘ride two horses at the 

same time’, adapting its policy in accordance with what is most beneficial at 

any given point in time. It is notable that the French president, even during the 

rapprochement phase that followed Joe Biden’s election, never really ceased 

to promote a European vision for defense. One of his foremost achievements 

in   this   regard   was   to   have   Biden   consistently   refer   to   the   necessity   of   a 

European   defense   system   in   his   public   statements,   one   that   would   be 

complementary to the US-led NATO. In terms of institutional developments, 

France   also   had   some   moderate   successes   during   the   Trump   and   Biden 

administrations,   with   European   defense   alternatives   materializing   in   the 

Permanent Structured Cooperation and the European Intervention Initiative, 

with the latter being headquartered in Paris. However, these projects are not 

remotely comparable to NATO in scope.

In other words, the vacillating US policy towards NATO was acutely 

felt by many European members of the alliance and fostered uncertainty about 

US reliability as a security guarantor for Europe, a development that France 

clearly tried to capitalize on by advancing its own security alternatives, in 

which it would have one of the principal roles, if not the leading role.

Thus, the traditional French pursuit of ‘strategic autonomy’ is evidently 

well   alive,   and   has   gained   prominence   in   its   Europeanist   incarnation.   The 

search for strategic autonomy also translated into practice in multiple other 

91

dimensions of French defense policy. The French response to the escalation of 

fighting in Ukraine in February 2022 is a case in point. Emmanuel Macron 

chose to maintain diplomatic contact with Russian President Vladimir Putin 

for many months after the start of the Special Military Operation, whereas 

Biden opted to cut all direct dialogue with his Russian counterpart. This can 

be inscribed in a broader French tendency of dampened hostility to Russia 

compared to the USA. All while standing firmly in the Western camp, France 

has been wary to not antagonize Russia excessively or to alienate the Russian 

leadership beyond a point of no return, giving priority to a more balanced 

diplomatic approach of its own making. This is vaguely reminiscent of the 

Cold   War   approach   developed   by   De   Gaulle,   encapsulated   in   the   slogan 

‘allied,   but   non-aligned’,   and   can   be   interpreted   as   an   attempt   at   softly 

balancing the United States. This strategic maneuvering is also discernable in 

the attitude displayed to Ukraine over the course of the SMO. France was 

initially among the less supportive members of the Western coalition against 

Russia, at a time when Joe Biden was adamant in his backing of Ukraine and 

became its most prominent supporter. Over time, however, as the USA grew 

more hesitant, with a major aid package stalling for months in the Congress 

and Trump triumphing in the 2024 electoral race, France adjusted its position, 

progressively transforming itself into one of the most prominent supporters of 

the Ukrainian cause. France thus flaunted a policy that was the reverse of the 

American one.

Another   notable   instance   in   which   France   applied   the   concept   of 

strategic autonomy was its policy in the Indo-Pacific. Yet again the preferred 

course was that of ‘allied, but non-aligned’. The period witnessed an increase 

in French interest for the region that was manifestly influenced by the US 

‘pivot to Asia’, and there was a partial overlap of the French and American 

conceptualization of the growing security challenges. Still, France opted for a 

92

partial,   not   full   alignment   with   the   United   States   and   its   surging   Quad 

framework,   insisting   instead   on   cultivating   its   bilateral   relations   with   the 

different actors in the Indo-Pacific. The country was also careful to distance 

itself from ‘Cold War’-style rhetoric and bipolar competition dynamics in the 

Indo-Pacific, and promoted an expanded EU presence in the region, in line 

with the Europeanist version of Gaullism.

Finally, an adherence to the notion of ‘strategic autonomy’ was applied 

in the French Middle Eastern policy as well, albeit less emphatically than in 

the   cases   of   Ukraine   and   the   Indo-Pacific.   The   French   armed   forces 

underscored their autonomy from US command during its patrolling of the 

Red Sea in Operation Prosperity Guardian in rather unequivocal wording. In 

the   later   stages   of   the   management   of   the   Gaza   War,   the   French   and   US 

approaches began to diverge, and US influence on the French response to the 

Israeli-Palestinian   conflict   became   less   pronounced.   French   bandwagoning 

with US interests toned down to the benefit of its own national interests, such 

as defending the sovereign rights of Lebanon, a country with which France 

has close cultural and historical ties, and taking the liberty to criticize Israel 

more for its military campaign in Gaza. Both actions can be understood as a 

French   attempt   at   rapprochement   with   the   Arab   countries   in   the   region, 

contrasting with the fiercely pro-Israeli line pursued by the United States.

93

Conclusion

The defense policies and strategic outlook of the United States have 

undergone considerable modifications over the last decade or so, as have those 

of   France.   The   unconventional   approach   chosen   by   Donald   Trump,   which 

initially appeared as an anomaly in US politics, most notably as concerns the 

management   of   the   North   Atlantic   Treaty   Organization,   could   now   be 

reassessed as having ushered in new norms due to their long-lasting impact, 

even more so as Trump has been reelected to a second term in office. The 

impact was absorbed by American allies, the oldest of which, France, can be 

said to have devised parts of its national defense strategy under the influence 

of the changes that unfolded under Donald Trump and Joe Biden over the 

period 2017-2025.

By meticulously retracing the main events and developments over the 

time   frame,   his   study   has   shown   that   paradigmatic   shifts   in   US   strategic 

thinking   were   paralleled   in   French   defense   policy,   though   France’s 

maneuvering on the international arena must also be seen in light of domestic 

political   traditions   with   deep   historical   roots.   The   systemic   factors,   as 

described in realist theory, can to some extent account for France’s behavior 

in the studied period. Above all, the power differential between the USA and 

France is a good indicator. The United States is the undisputed superpower in 

the international system, while France is a state which operates in the grey 

zone between great power and middle power status, though it does possess the 

potential of becoming a superpower as part of a consolidated European Union 

with   a   unified,   coherent   foreign   policy.   This   potential   remains   largely 

untapped   to   this   day,   by   France   as   by   other   EU   member   states,   but   does 

inform the French worldview in important ways. Considering the discrepancy 

in   military   might   and   France’s   status   as   an   ally,   it   would   be   expected   of 

France   to   adhere   to   the   strategy   of   bandwagoning   with   the   United   States. 

94

Indeed, bandwagoning occurred frequently throughout the studied time frame. 

The backing of Ukraine, the intervention in Syria and the support for Israel are 

all instances of this. However, there were also many cases where France did 

not   fully   align   with   the   US   preferred   policy,   but   deviated   significantly,   a 

behavior which may be interpreted as attempts to balance the USA, to the 

extent   that   the   power   differential   allows   it.   Domestic   factors   are   key   to 

understand   the   interplay   between   France’s   bandwagoning   and   balancing 

strategies.

French   strategic   culture   has   historically   been   split   between   two 

opposing visions that emerged in the early Cold War. One, Atlanticism, favors 

close cooperation with the United States, if not outright subordination, and is 

chiefly   embodied   in   the   North   Atlantic   Treaty   Organization.   The   other, 

Gaullism, has given priority to France achieving strategic autonomy from the 

USA   and   pursuing   an   independent   foreign   and   defense   policy.   The   main 

expression of the Gaullist vein in French politics was the decision to stay 

outside of NATO’s integrated central command between 1966 and 2009. The 

study   has   found   that   the   Gaullist   dimension   has   been   significantly 

strengthened over the last decade, represented by a surge in popularity of the 

French far right, with the governing party Renaissance also having a clear 

Gaullist   component.   The   Atlanticist   movement,   represented   by   centrist 

parties, has experienced a relative weakening. It is difficult to ascertain any 

direct US influence on the evolution of the conventional centrist and far-right 

parties. The study did, however, conclude that American political dynamics 

shaped the foreign policy adopted by French President Emmanuel Macron.

Among the overarching tendencies in US foreign policy over the entire 

studied period was the ‘pivot to Asia’, which highlighted Asia as the foremost 

region of interest to the USA and framed the People’s Republic of China as 

the United States’ chief competitor globally, all to the detriment of Europe, 

95

which   has   now   been   demoted   to   a   second   position   in   the   US   ranking   of 

priorities. This change in course was arguably more rhetorical than practical, 

as the main concerns during Joe Biden’s presidency continued to be Europe 

and the Middle East, largely due to the two major conflicts in Ukraine and 

Gaza erupting during his time in office. At any rate there was a reevaluation 

of the transatlantic relationship by Washington, D.C., with clear demands that 

the European members of the alliance step up their defense spending as the 

US   implemented   its   pivot   to   Asia.   This   policy,   announced   by   Trump,   but 

continued under Biden, appears to have affected French defense expenditure 

to a limited degree. It did, however, have significant implications for France’s 

relations with the other European members of NATO.

Emmanuel   Macron,   while   on   the   surface   an   Atlanticist,   exhibits   a 

worldview that is strongly influenced by a moderate variant of Gaullism that 

identifies   the   French   national   interest   with   broader   European   strategic 

autonomy. It is a pragmatic approach that acknowledges the contemporary 

limits to French power projection, and seeks to mitigate these shortcomings by 

pooling   its   resources   with   those   of   other   European   states.   Macron   has 

consistently   promoted   the   creation   of   a   more   effective   European   defense 

system   during   his   presidency,   and   conspicuously   sought   to   exploit   the 

increased uncertainty among other allies about US reliability to promote a 

European vision of defense. This is apparent from the variation in French 

discourse, which accentuated the need for more close-knit European defense 

cooperation   when   the   USA   expressed   weakened   commitment   to   NATO 

(under Trump), but reaffirmed transatlantic bonds when the USA veered back 

to a more conventional Atlanticist pattern of conduct (under Biden). Thus, 

French   strategies   of   bandwagoning   and   soft   balancing   alternated   with 

fluctuations in US NATO policy.

96

The French also pursued strategic autonomy from the United States in a 

number of cases outside the scope of the North Atlantic framework. This was 

most notably palpable in the Indo-Pacific policy adopted by France, which 

values bilateral relations over coalition-building and consciously avoids the 

bipolarization   of   the   region   espoused   by   the   United   States.   France 

consequently resisted full alignment with the USA, though it still acts as an 

ally in the Indo-Pacific. The variation in the French approach to Russia and 

Ukraine   can   arguably   also   be   interpreted   as   a   game   plan   to   create   further 

distance between themselves and the White House. Other instances include 

the French policy towards the Arab-Israeli conflict after the onset of the Gaza 

War, in particular its handling of aspects related to the Red Sea and Lebanon 

fronts.

Beyond French posturing vis-a-vis the USA, relations between the two 

countries   were   generally   cordial,   except   for   a   few   moments   of   heightened 

tensions that resulted from adverse French reaction to defense policies chosen 

by   the   United   States.   These   include   the   decision   to   withdraw   American 

combat   troops   from   Northeast   Syria   in   late   2019   and,   most   of   all,   the 

announcement of AUKUS in late 2021, which led to a souring of bilateral 

relations.   It   is   still   too   early   to   conclude   whether   the   latter   incident   has 

permanently damaged US-French defense cooperation, though the diplomatic 

crisis between the countries was only a temporary one. 

The return of Donald Trump to the White House in January 2021, the 

endpoint of the time frame of this study, has given renewed relevance to the 

topic   of   transatlantic   security   cooperation.   Against   the   background   of   the 

conflict in Ukraine, the resumed criticism of European allies by the second 

Trump administration has cast serious doubt on the viability of NATO as a 

security   framework   for   Europe.   It   is   still   an   open   question   whether   the 

European Union, if called upon, will be able to successfully transition to a 

97

purely European defense system, and whether France will have the capacity to 

steer   a   project   of   such   amplitude.   The   French   government   has   recently 

intensified its efforts to bring about a European collective defense, but faces 

significant hurdles, including reticence by Eastern European states such as 

Poland and the Baltics to renounce the USA as their main security guarantor, 

difficulties in coordinating efforts and smoothing out differences among the 

27   member   states,   as   well   as   an   economically   weakened   German   partner, 

which would be indispensable in boosting a European defense industry that 

manufactures its own equipment and weapons.

There   are   multiple   possibilities   for   further   research   on   this   topic.   In 

particular, it would be valuable to examine in more detail the interactions 

between   the   French   far   right   and   French   defense   policy,   considering   the 

relatively high probability that National Rally may win a presidential election 

in   2027   or   have   a   Prime   Minister   appointed   in   the   near   future.   Increased 

political clout of the far right may not only lead to deviations and distortions 

in bilateral relations with the United States, but also compromise the European 

integration process within the domain of the Common Security and Defense 

Policy. The role of the European Union as an independent actor with its own 

agency could also be researched, to elucidate the degree to which it affects 

US-French bilateral relations, and better understand the developments over the 

last decade in the sphere of collective European defense. It would then be 

beneficial   to   study   the   issue   from   another   methodological   perspective,   for 

instance combining discourse analysis with a social constructivist framework.

98

References

Al Jazeera (2019, October 25). US to deploy more troops to eastern Syria to 

secure oilfields. Al Jazeera. 

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/10/25/us-to-deploy-more-troops-

to-eastern-syria-to-secure-oilfields

The American Presidency Project. (2024, June 8). Joint Statement by 
  President Biden and President Emmanuel Macron of France - 
  French-American Roadmap. The American  Presidency Project. 

https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/joint-statement-president-

biden-and-president-emmanuel-macron-france-french-american

Bag, A., Roy, S., & Shah, A. I. (2024). Decoding the US-NATO Dynamics: A 

  Thorough Analysis of Donald Trump and Joe Biden's Foreign Policy 

  Approaches. In Dealing With Regional Conflicts of Global Importance 

(pp. 104-123). IGI Global. 

Belam, M., Greve, J. E., & Singh, M. (2021, June 17). Biden rejects Putin’s 

‘ridiculous comparison’ between Capitol rioters and Alexei Navalny at 

summit - as it happened. The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2021/jun/16/joe-biden-vladi

  mir-putin-us-russia-summit-meeting-geneva-ukraine-live-updates

Belgacem, K. (2021). France's Role Within NATO: Realism Through New 

  Relations With Russia–Franco-Russian Relations: A Significant 

  Element. In NATO and the Future of European and Asian Security 

(pp. 44-53). IGI Global.

Belin, C. (2018). Balancing Act: The limits of pragmatism in the 

Franco-American relationship and the way forward. Washington, DC: 

  Brookings Institution, October.  

Bell, M., & Masters, J. (2018, April 23). Macron to put ‘bromance’ with 

  Trump to the test during US visit. CNN World. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99

https://edition.cnn.com/2018/04/23/europe/emmanuel-macron-donald-tr

ump-visit-intl/index.html

Biden, J. R., Jr. (2022, October 12). National Security Strategy. 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/8-N

ovember-Combined-PDF-for-Upload.pdf

Billon-Galland, A., & Quencez, M. (2017). Can France and Germany make 

  PESCO work as a process toward EU defense?. German Marshall Fund 

of the United States. 

Boffey, D., & Rankin, J. (2017, May 25). Trump rebukes NATO leaders for 

  not paying defence bills. The Guardian. 

  https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/may/25/trump-rebukes-nato-l

  eaders-for-not-paying-defence-bills

Boniface, P. (2021, March 21). Why the Legacy of De Gaulle and Mitterrand 

Still Matters for the French Public Opinion. IRIS. 

https://www.iris-france.org/en/presse/why-the-legacy-of-de-gaulle-and-

  mitterand-still-matters-for-the-french-public-opinion/

Borger, J., Chrisafis, A., Connolly, K., Harding, L., Roth, A., & Walker, S. 

(2022, February 9). Macron claims Putin gave him personal assurances 

on Ukraine. The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/08/macron-zelenskiy-ukr

aine-talks-moscow-denies-deal-to-de-escalate

Borger, J., & Chulov, M. (2019, December 20). Trump shocks allies and 

advisers with plan to pull US troops out of Syria. The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/dec/19/us-troops-syria-wit

hdrawal-trump

Bortoletto, F. (2025, March 24). Macron energizes the coalition of the willing. 

  Eunews. 

https://www.eunews.it/en/2025/03/24/macron-speeds-up-coalition-of-th

e-willing-talks/

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100

Bourgery-Gonse, T. (2024, April 3). La France insoumise s’engage à « aider à 

se défendre » tout pays de l’OTAN attaqué par la Russie [La France 

Insoumise pledges to “help defend” any NATO country attacked by 

  Russia]. Euractiv. 

https://www.euractiv.fr/section/elections/news/la-france-insoumise-sen

gage-a-aider-a-se-defendre-tout-pays-de-lotan-attaque-par-la-russie/

Bozo, F., & Parmentier, G. (2019). France and the United States: waiting for 

regime change. In Survival 49.1 (pp. 181-197). Routledge.

Breeden, A., & Méheut, C. (2024, February 26). Macron Does Not Rule Out 

Sending Western Troops to Ukraine. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/26/world/europe/europe-ukraine-sup

port-meeting.Html

Breeden, A., & Specia, M. (2024, October 2). Allies Say They Came To 

Israel’s Aid During Iran’s Missile Attack. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/02/world/middleeast/israel-iran-miss

ile-attack-us-uk-france.html

Bryant, M., Chrisafis, A., & Wintour, P. (2024, February 28). Macron faces 

  EU backlash after suggesting sending troops to Ukraine. The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/feb/27/sweden-rules-out-sen

ding-troops-to-ukraine-after-nato-membership-agreed

Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs. (n.d.). NATO summits and 

  meetings. U.S. Department of State. 

https://2017-2021.state.gov/nato-summits/

Bureau of Political-Military Affairs. (2025, January 20). U.S. Security 

  Cooperation with  France - Fact Sheet. U.S. Department of State. 

https://www.state.gov/u-s-security-cooperation-with-france/

Burns, R. (2022, February 11). Biden orders 3000 more troops to Poland amid 

  Ukraine crisis. Associated Press News. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101

https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-joe-biden-jake-sullivan-europ

e-poland-0dc69d2142d344a2311dc3b54107d1e7

Cadier, D. (2024). The end of dissonance? France and central Europe’s newly 

converging strategic outlooks. International Politics, 1-12.

Cantié, V. (2022, April 5). Rester dans l’Otan un peu, beaucoup, pas du tout : 

ce que proposent les candidats à la présidentielle [Stay in NATO a little, 

a lot, not at all: what the presidential candidates propose]. France Inter. 

https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceinter/rester-dans-l-otan-un-peu-beauco

up-pas-du-tout-ce-que-proposent-les-candidats-a-la-presidentielle-9967

687

CBS News. (2018, April 14). U.S. launches strike on Syria: Trump announced 

  U.S., Britain, France precision strikes on Syria chemical weapons 

capabilities Friday night. CBS News. 

https://www.cbsnews.com/news/strike-on-syria-trump-us-led-britian-fra

nce-bombing-missiles-trump-us-live-stream-2018-04-14/

China Daily. (2021, August 27). US withdrawal from Afghanistan leaves 

situation ‘no more  under control’: Macron. China Daily. 

https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202108/27/WS61283efca310efa1bd6

6b816.html

Chrisafis, A. (2017, July 13). Donald Trump offers hand of friendship to 

  Emmanuel Macron on Paris visit. The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jul/13/trump-offers-hand-o

f-friendship-to-macron-on-paris-visit

Collier, D. (2011). Understanding process tracing. PS: Political Science and 

  Politics, 4, 823–830. 

https://polisci.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/people/u3827/Understandi

ng%20Process%20Tracing.pdf

Crowley, M. (2021, October 20). Blinken Faces an Awkward Visit to Paris, 

  His ‘Second Home’. The New York Times. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/03/us/politics/antony-blinken-france

-submarine.html

Davis, J. H. (2018, April 25). Macron Critiques Trump’s Policies in Speech to 

  Congress. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/25/us/politics/macron-congress-spee

ch-trump.html

Dimitrova, A. (2022). Transatlantic Relations from Trump to Biden: Between 

  Continuity and Change. L’Europe En Formation, n° 394(1), 2–10. 

https://doi.org/10.3917/eufor.394.0002

Dolan, C. J. (2023). Continuity and Change in US Foreign Policy toward 

  Nato. In The Politics of US Foreign Policy and NATO: Continuity and 
  Change From The Cold War to the Rise of China (pp. 1-12). Cham: 

Springer International Publishing.

Duggal, H. (2024, July 11). How much is each NATO country spending on its 

  military in 2024? Al Jazeera. 

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/7/11/how-much-does-each-nato-

country-spend-in-2024

The Economist. (2019, November 7). Emmanuel Macron warns Europe: 

  NATO is becoming brain-dead. The Economist. 

https://www.economist.com/europe/2019/11/07/emmanuel-macron-war

ns-europe-nato-is-becoming-brain-dead

Élysée. (2012, February 5). Entretien de M. Nicolas Sarkozy, Président de la 
  République,  dans "Politique internationale" du 5 février 2012, sur les 

grands dossiers de politique étrangère notamment la situation dans les 

pays arabes, les pays du G20 face à la crise économique, l'Afghanistan 

et la construction européenne [Interview with Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy, 

President of the Republic, in “Politique internationale” of February 5, 

2012, on major foreign policy issues, including the situation in Arab 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103

countries, the G20 countries facing the economic crisis, Afghanistan 

and European construction]. Élysée.

https://www.elysee.fr/nicolas-sarkozy/2012/02/05/entretien-de-m-nicol

as-sarkozy-president-de-la-republique-dans-politique-internationale-du-

5-fevrier-2012-sur-les-grands-dossiers-de-politique-etrangere-notamme

nt-la-situation-dans-les-pays-arabes-les-pays-du-g20-face-a-la-crise-eco

nomique-lafgh

Élysée. (2017, September 26). President Macron gives speech on new 

initiative for Europe. Élysée. 

https://www.elysee.fr/en/emmanuel-macron/2017/09/26/president-macr

on-gives-speech-on-new-initiative-for-europe

Élysée. (2021a). Déplacement du Président Emmanuel Macron en Polynésie 

française [President Emmanuel Macron’s trip to French Polynesia]. 

  Élysée. 

https://www.elysee.fr/emmanuel-macron/deplacement-du-president-em

  manuel-macron-en-polynesie-francaise

Élysée. (2021b, August 16). Speech by President Emmanuel Macron on the 

situation in Afghanistan. Élysée. 

https://www.elysee.fr/en/emmanuel-macron/2021/08/16/speech-by-pres

ident-emmanuel-macron-on-the-situation-in-afghanistan

Élysée. (2022a, February 20). Entretien téléphonique avec Vladimir 
  POUTINE, Président de la Fédération de Russie [Telephone 

conversation with Vladimir PUTIN, President of the Russian 

Federation]. Élysée. 

https://www.elysee.fr/emmanuel-macron/2022/02/20/entretien-telephon

ique-avec-vladimir-poutine-president-de-la-federation-de-russie-1

Élysée. (2022b, September 11). Entretien téléphonique avec M. Vladimir 
  POUTINE, Président de la Fédération de Russie [Telephone 

conversation with Mr. Vladimir PUTIN, President of the Russian 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104

Federation]. Élysée. 

https://www.elysee.fr/emmanuel-macron/2022/09/11/entretien-telephon

ique-avec-m-vladimir-poutine-president-de-la-federation-de-russie-2

Élysée. (2024, April 24). Europe speech. Élysée. 

https://www.elysee.fr/en/emmanuel-macron/2024/04/24/europe-speech

Erlanger, S., & Jakes, L. (2021, October 28). Blinken, in Paris, Tries to 

  Restore Trust After Submarine Snub. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/05/world/europe/france-us-blinken-

diplomacy.html

Europe 1. (2022, March 6). Mélenchon propose des “alliances 

altermondialistes” hors de l’Otan [Mélenchon proposes 

“alter-globalization alliances” outside NATO]. Europe 1. 

https://www.europe1.fr/politique/melenchon-propose-des-alliances-alter

  mondialistes-hors-de-lotan-4097757

European Commission (2018, May 18). European Commission acts to protect 
  the interests of EU companies investing in Iran as part of the EU’s 
  continued commitment to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. 

  European Commission. 

  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_18_3861

European Defence Agency. (2025). Permanent Structured Cooperation 

(PESCO). European Defence Agency. 

https://eda.europa.eu/what-we-do/EU-defence-initiatives/permanent-str

uctured-cooperation-(PESCO)

Fayet, H. (2024, March 6). Pourquoi la France ne proposera pas de “parapluie 

nucléaire” à  l’Europe [Why France will not propose a “nuclear 

umbrella” to Europe]. Rubicon. 

https://lerubicon.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/Pourquoi-la-France-n

e-proposera-pas-de-parapluie-nucleaire-a-lEurope-Le-Rubicon.pdf

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105

Fontemaggi, F. (2023, July 18). Emmanuel Macron dans le Pacifique pour 

“réengager la France” dans la région [Emmanuel Macron in the Pacific 

to “reengage France” in the region]. France Info. 

https://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/polynesie/tahiti/polynesie-francaise/emma

nuel-macron-dans-le-pacifique-pour-reengager-la-france-dans-la-region

-1414832.html

Foreign Policy Association. (2025, February 10). France & Strategic 

  Autonomy: Redefining Europe's Role In The 21st Century. Foreign 
  Policy Association. 

https://fpa.org/france-strategic-autonomy-redefining-europes-role-in-the

-21st-century/

France Channel. (2024, November 12). The History of Franco-American 

  Political Relations. France Channel. 

https://www.francechannel.tv/Blog/FrenchCulture/History/The-History-

of-Franco-A merican-Political-Relations

France in the Philippines and in Micronesia. (2024, August 12). French 
  Armed Forces participated in the multilateral military exercise 

SAMASAMA for the third consecutive year (October 2-13, 2023). 

France in the Philippines and in Micronesia. 

https://ph.ambafrance.org/French-Armed-Forces-participated-in-the-mu

ltilateral-military-exercise-SAMASAMA

France Info. (2022, February 10). Crise en Ukraine : l’Otan est responsable 

des tensions avec    la Russie, estime Jean-Luc Mélenchon dans “Elysée 

2022” [Crisis in Ukraine: NATO is responsible for tensions with 

  Russia, says Jean-Luc Mélanchon in “Elysée 2022”]. France Info. 

https://www.francetvinfo.fr/economie/emploi/carriere/vie-professionnel

le/crise-en-ukraine-l-otan-est-responsable-des-tensions-avec-la-russie-a

ccuse-jean-luc-melenchon-dans-elysee-2022_4954374.html

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106

France 24. (2021a, July 14). Macron announces France’s Sahel military force 

  will end in early 2022. France 24. 

https://www.france24.com/en/france/20210713-macron-announces-fran

ce-s-sahel-military-force-will-end-in-early-2022

France 24. (2021b, September 21). Biden hails Australia alliance in meeting 

  with Morrison. France 24. 

https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/20210921-biden-hails-australia

-alliance-in-meeting-with-morrison

France 24. (2022, April 13). Le Pen wants France out of NATO integrated 

  command, backs NATO-Russia links. France 24. 

  https://www.france24.com/en/france/20220413-le-pen-wants-france-out

  -of-nato-integrated-command-backs-nato-russia-links

France 24. (2024a, March 17). US military operations across the Sahel at risk 

  as Niger breaks off military cooperation. France 24. 

  https://www.france24.com/en/africa/20240317-niger-revokes-military-c

  ooperation-with-us

France 24. (2024b, May 2). Macron reaffirms possibility of sending troops to 

  Ukraine. France 24. 

  https://www.france24.com/en/france/20240502-macron-doesn-t-rule-ou

  t-troops-for-ukraine-if-russia-breaks-front-lines

Francis, E., Masih, N., & Pietsch, B. (2024, October 6). Macron urges 

countries to ‘stop delivering weapons’ to Israel for war in Gaza. The 

  Washington Post. 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/10/05/macron-france-sto

p-arms-israel-gaza-war/

Goldgeier, J. (2019). NATO at 70: Is the USA still in it for the long haul?. 

Journal of Transatlantic Studies, 17, 255-267. 

Grand, C. (2024). NATO and France. In Routledge Handbook of NATO (pp. 

236-247). Routledge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107

Groupe d’études géopolitiques. (2025, February 27). The Geopolitics of the 

Indo-Pacific: France’s strategy. Groupe d’études géopolitiques. 

https://geopolitique.eu/en/2025/02/27/the-geopolitics-of-the-indo-pacifi

c-frances-strategy/

Guseinov, K. (2020). French initiatives in the field of EU security and 

defense. 

Haglund, D. G. (2022). NATO’S “MACRONIAN” PERIL. Transatlantic 

  Relations: Challenge and Resilience. 

Hein, J. K. (2002). Preserving the Myth: British and French Relations with 

the United States Following World War II (Doctoral dissertation, 

  University of Oregon).

Holland, S., & Piper, E. (2017, January 28). Trump says he is only in early 

stages of considering lifting Russia sanctions. Reuters. 

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-britain-idUSKBN15B104

Irish, J., & Saul, J. (2024, January 11). France patrolling with US-led Red Sea 

  mission, focused on own ships. Reuters. 

https://www.reuters.com/world/french-military-escorting-french-ships-t

hrough-red-sea-naval-commander-2024-01-11/

Johnson, Jenna (2017, May 8). Trump plans to meet incoming French 

president Macron in Brussels this month. The Washington Post. 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/tru

  mp-plans-to-meet-incoming-french-president-macron-in-brussels-later-t

his-month/

Kaufman, J. P. (2017). The US perspective on NATO under Trump: lessons of 

the past and  prospects for the future. International Affairs, 93(2), 

251-266.

Kempin, R. (2021). France’s foreign and security policy under President 

  Macron. SWP Research Paper, 28, 2021.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108

Knutsen, B. O. (2022). A weakening transatlantic relationship? Redefining the 

  EU–US security and defence cooperation. Politics and Governance, 

10(2), 165-175. 

Koenig, N., & Walter-Franke, M. (2017). France and Germany: 

Spearheading a European Security and Defense Union?. Jacques 

  Delors Institute. 

La France Insoumise. (2022, January 3). Proposition de loi pour que la 

  France sorte de l’Otan [Bill for France to leave NATO]. La France 

Insoumise.

https://lafranceinsoumise.fr/niche-parlementaire-2022-de-la-france-inso

umise/ppl-france-sorte-otan/

Lagneau, L. (2023, December 23). Sécurité en mer Rouge : La France et 

l’Italie ne placeront pas leurs frégates sous commandement américain 

[Red Sea security: France and Italy will not place their frigates under 

  US command]. Zone Militaire. 

https://www.opex360.com/2023/12/23/securite-en-mer-rouge-la-france-

et-litalie-ne-placeront-pas-leurs-fregates-sous-commandement-americai

n/

Lebovich, A. (2021, March 19). How France and the US can work to stabilise 

the Sahel. European Council on Foreign Relations. 

https://ecfr.eu/article/how-france-and-the-us-can-work-to-stabilise-the-s

ahel/

Lefebvre, M. (2021, February 1). Europe puissance, souveraineté européenne, 

autonomie stratégique : un débat qui avance pour une Europe qui 

s'affirme [Europe as a power, European sovereignty, strategic 

autonomy, a debate that is moving forward for a Europe that is asserting 

itself]. Fondation Robert Schuman. 

https://www.robert-schuman.eu/questions-d-europe/0582-europe-puissa

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109

nce-souverainete-europeenne-autonomie-strategique-un-debat-qui-avan

ce-pour-une-eur

Les Républicains. (2024, March 25). Bâtir une Europe de la défense qui 

garantisse la paix et la sécurité [Building a European defense system 

that guarantees peace and security]. Les Républicains. 

https://republicains.fr/batir-une-europe-de-la-defense-qui-garantisse-la-

paix-et-la-securite/

Lichfield, J. (2021, November 9). Why all French politicians are Gaullists. 

  POLITICO. 

https://www.politico.eu/article/france-charles-de-gaulle-gaullists-emma

nuel-macron-marine-le-pen/

Lieven, A. (2024, April 25). Macron’s strategy: A ‘Gaullist’ betrayal of de 

  Gaulle. Responsible statecraft. 

https://responsiblestatecraft.org/emmanuel-macron-troops-ukraine/

Liptak, K. (2018, June 9). Trump at G7: Misses Macron meeting, suggests 

bringing Russia back. CNN Politics. 

https://edition.cnn.com/2018/06/08/politics/trump-macron-bilateral-mee

ting/index.ht ml

Loaëc, M. (2022, March 15). “On reste dans l’Otan, mais il nous faut une 

autonomie de défense”, défend Eric Zemmour [”We remain in NATO, 

but we need defense autonomy”, argues Eric Zemmour]. TF1 INFO. 

https://www.tf1info.fr/politique/on-reste-dans-l-otan-mais-il-nous-faut-

une-autonomie-de-defense-defend-eric-zemmour-2213576.html

MacAskill, E., & Crerar, P. (2018, July 12). Donald Trump tells Nato allies to 

spend 4% of GDP on defence. The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/jul/11/donald-trump-tells-nat

o-allies-to-spend-4-of-gdp-on-defence

Macias, A. (2022, August 9). Biden signs ratification documents approving 

  NATO membership for Finland and Sweden. CNBC. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110

https://www.cnbc.com/2022/08/09/biden-to-ratify-finland-and-swedens

-nato-membership-bids.html

Manning, R. (2018). US Indo-Pacific strategy: Myths and reality. Valdai 

paper, 89.

Marcadé, S. (2022, March 16). OTAN : la perception des Européens a-t-elle 

évolué depuis l’invasion de l’Ukraine ? [NATO: Has European 

perception changed since the invasion of Ukraine?]. YouGov. 

https://fr.yougov.com/politics/articles/41575-OTAN-evolution-percepti

on-des-europeens

Maritime News. (2023, December 24). Why did countries leave Operation 

  Prosperity Guardian? Maritime Tales & Cutting Edge Sails. 

https://sailorspeaks.com/2023/12/24/why-countries-left-operation-prosp

erity-guardian/

Martin, M. (2017, March 19). Germany rejects Trump’s claim it owes NATO 

and U.S. ‘vast sums’ for defense. Reuters. 

https://www.reuters.com/article/world/germany-rejects-trump-s-claim-it

-owes-nato-and-u-s-vast-sums-for-defense-idUSKBN16Q0D7/

Maślanka, Ł. (2023). France’s Need to Be Different: Macron Policy Includes 

“Balancing Power”.

McCaskill, N. D. (2017, April 13). Trump reverses on NATO: ‘It’s no longer 

obsolete.’ POLITICO. 

https://www.politico.eu/article/trump-reverses-on-nato-its-no-longer-ob

solete/

McGreal, C. (2023, November 16). US wasn’t always Israel’s strongest ally - 

  what changed and why? The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/nov/16/why-israel-allies-e

xplainer

McNamara, E. M. (2022). US global security partnerships in the Biden era: 

  Twilight or regeneration?.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111

Medini, S. (2024, October 18). Assessing U.S.-French Cooperation a Year 
  After October 7. The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. 

https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/assessing-us-frenc

h-cooperation-year-after-october-7

Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs. (2021, July). France’s Indo-Pacific 

Strategy. https://franceintheus.org/IMG/pdf/Indopacifique_web.pdf

Miskimmon, A., O’Loughlin, B., Roselle, L., & Leslie, F. (2023). Repairing 

the United States’ reputation? The US strategic narrative and the Biden 

administration. In Soft power and the future of US foreign policy (pp. 

78-99). Manchester University Press. 

NATO. (2017a, April 12). Joint press conference by NATO Secretary General 

Jens Stoltenberg and the President of the United States, Donald Trump. 

  NATO. https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_143135.htm

NATO. (2017b, December 15). Statement by the North Atlantic Council on 

the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_150016.htm?selectedLocale=

en

NATO. (2019a, February 1). Statement on Russia’s failure to comply with the 

Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, issued by the North 

  Atlantic Council, Brussels, 1 February 2019. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_162996.htm

NATO. (2019b, November 14). Secretary General thanks President Trump 

for his commitment to NATO. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_170796.htm

NATO. (2019c, December 3). Press point by NATO Secretary General Jens 

Stoltenberg and US President Donald Trump. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_171542.htm?selectedLoca

le=en

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112

NATO. (2020). 2019 NATO Annual Tracking Survey. NATO.

https://www.nato.int/SGReport/2019/audience-insight-en.pdf

NATO. (2021, January 26). NATO Secretary General speaks with US 

  President Biden. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_180872.htm?selectedLocale=

en

NATO. (2022, May 31). 2021 NATO Summit. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/184620.htm

NATO. (2024a, March 28). NATO Headquarters. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_49284.htm

NATO. (2024b, November 14). NATO Summits. NATO. 

https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_50115.htm

NATO Public Diplomacy Division. (2022, March 17). NATO Annual 

Tracking Research 2021. 

https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/2022/3/pdf/220331-a

nnual_tracker_report.pdf

NATO Public Diplomacy Division. (2024a). Defence Expenditure of NATO 

  Countries (2014-2024). 

https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/2024/6/pdf/240617-

def-exp-2024-en.pdf

NATO Public Diplomacy Division. (2024b, July 5). NATO Audience 

  Research: pre-Summit polling results 2024. 

https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/2024/7/pdf/240705-

pre-summit-polling-results-data-t.pdf

Naval News. (2024, June 10). US Navy Kicks Off Exercise Valiant Shield 

2024 with JMSDF, Canadian and French Navy. Naval News. 

https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2024/06/us-navy-kicks-off-exe

rcise-valiant-shield-2024-with-jmsdf-canadian-and-french-navy/

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113

Naval Technology. (2019, May 17). Multinational La Perouse exercises start 

in Gulf of Bengal. Naval Technology. 

https://www.naval-technology.com/news/multinational-la-perouse-exer

cises-start-in-gulf-of-bengal/?cf-view

The New York Times. (2022, April 24). French Election: Macron Holds Off 

Far-Right Push. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/live/2022/04/24/world/french-election-runoff

-results

Nicolas, F. (2019, December 12). France’s Indo-Pacific Strategy: inclusive 

and principled. East Asia Forum. 

https://eastasiaforum.org/2019/12/12/frances-indo-pacific-strategy-inclu

sive-and-principled/

Nuclear Threat Initiative. (2025, January 29). France - country spotlight. 

  Nuclear Threat Initiative. https://www.nti.org/countries/france/

Obama, B. H. (2015). NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY. 

https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2015_nati

onal_security_strategy_2.pdf

Ostermann, F. (2018). Security, defense discourse and identity in NATO and 

  Europe: How France changed foreign policy. Routledge. 

Pajon, C. (2021, February 9). France’s Indo-Pacific strategy and the Quad 

  Plus. IFRI. 

https://www.ifri.org/en/external-articles/frances-indo-pacific-strategy-a

nd-quad-plus

Pannier, A. (2017). From one exceptionalism to another: France’s strategic 

relations with the United States and the United Kingdom in the 

post-Cold War era. Journal of strategic studies, 40(4), 475-504. 

Pannier, A., & Schmitt, O. (2019). To fight another day: France between the 

fight against terrorism and future warfare. International Affairs, 95(4), 

897-916. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114

President of Russia. (2022, February 8). News conference following 

  Russian-French talks. President of Russia. 

http://www.en.kremlin.ru/events/president/transcripts/67735

Pruchnicka, P. (2022). Selected Aspects of France’s Foreign Policy towards 

the United States during Emmanuel Macron’s Presidency from 2017 to 

2022. Preferencje Polityczne/Political Preferences, 30(1), 49–59. 

Rajagopalan, R. (2021, August 27). The Quad Conducts Malabar Naval 

  Exercise. The Diplomat. 

https://thediplomat.com/2021/08/the-quad-conducts-malabar-naval-exer

cise/

Razafinarivo, H. (2025, April 22). Emmanuel Macron à La Réunion : le 

président de la République est arrivé, retour sur sa dernière visite sur 

l’île en 2019 [Emmanuel Macron in La Réunion: the president of the 

  Republic has arrived, a look back at his last visit to the island in 2019]. 

  France Info. 

https://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/reunion/emmanuel-macron-a-la-reunion-le

-president-de-la-republique-est-arrive-retour-sur-sa-derniere-visite-sur-l

-ile-en-2019-1580066.html

Rogers, K. (2021, November 12). Harris Meets Macron, Signaling a ‘New 

  Era’ After Sub Snub, Both Say. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/10/world/europe/france-kamala-harr

is-macron.html

Rose, G. (1998). Neoclassical realism and theories of foreign policy. World 

politics, 51(1), 144-172.

Rynning, S. (2017). The divide: France, Germany and political NATO. 

International Affairs, 93(2), 267-289.

Schmitt, O. (2017). The reluctant Atlanticist: France’s security and defence 

policy in a transatlantic context. Journal of Strategic Studies, 40(4), 

463-474. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115

Schreer, B. (2019). Trump, NATO and the Future of Europe’s Defence. The 

  RUSI Journal, 164(1), 10-17.

Schuessler, J. M., & Shifrinson, J. R. (2019). The Shadow of Exit from 

  NATO. Strategic Studies Quarterly, 13(3), 38-51.

Schuette, L. A. (2021). Why NATO survived Trump: the neglected role of 

Secretary-General  Stoltenberg. International Affairs, 97(6), 1863-1881. 

Sheng, E. L. (2023). The Reconstruction of the US–EU Alliance in Joe 

  Biden’s Administration: The G7 and NATO as Instruments to Contain 

  China and Russia. In China’s Belt and Road Initiative and the Triangle 
  Great Game of Contemporary International Politics (pp. 79-109). 

Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore.

Shvili, J. (2021, June 8). Overseas France. World Atlas. 

https://www.worldatlas.com/geography/french-overseas-territories.html

Simón, L. (2023, November 22). NATO’s China and Indo-Pacific 

  Conundrum. NATO Review. 

https://www.nato.int/docu/review/articles/2023/11/22/natos-china-and-i

ndo-pacific-conundrum/index.html

Singh, R. S. (2024). The Biden and Trump Doctrines in Comparative 

Perspective. In Presidential Leadership and Foreign Policy: 
  Comparing the Trump and Biden Doctrines (pp. 17-39). Cham: 

Springer Nature Switzerland. 

Sloan, S. R. (1997). French defense policy: Gaullism meets the post-Cold War 

  world. Arms Control Today, 27(2), 3. 

Smith, B. (2019, October 17). Syria: US withdrawal and Turkish incursion. 

  House of Commons Library. 

https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp-8710/

Smith, D. (2021, December 30). Biden and Putin exchange warnings during 

phone call amid rising Ukraine tensions. The Guardian. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/dec/30/biden-putin-call-rus

sia-us-ukraine-tensions

Sperling, J., & Webber, M. (2019). Trump’s foreign policy and NATO: Exit 

and voice. Review of International Studies, 45(3), 511-526. 

Statler, K. C. (2016). France-US Relations. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia 

of American History. 

Statler, K. C. (2023). Anyone But Charles de Gaulle: US WWII Policy toward 

France. 

Staunton, E. (2022). ‘France is back’: Macron’s European policy to rescue 

‘European civilisation’ and the liberal international order. Third World 

  Quarterly, 43(1), 18-34. 

The Straits Times. (2021, September 30). French ambassador returns to US as 

tensions ease over Aukus submarine deal. The Straits Times. 

https://www.straitstimes.com/world/united-states/french-ambassador-re

turns-to-us-as-tensions-ease

Tankersley, J. (2024, May 14). How Biden’s Trade War With China Differs 

From Trump’s. The New York Times. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2024/05/14/us/politics/biden-trump-china-tra

de.html

Tebin, P. (2022, December 9). The New US National Security Strategy. Valdai 

  Club. 

https://valdaiclub.com/a/valdai-papers/the-new-us-national-security-stra

tegy/

Tekir, G. (2021). France-Led Security: Balancing against NATO (Tema 

  Central).

Trelsman, D. (2024, July 5). America Is in Denial About NATO’s Future. 

  Foreign Policy. 

https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/07/05/america-nato-ukraine-denial/

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117

Tromeur, F. (2023, July 23). Du général de Gaulle à Macron, quand le 

président de la République visite la Calédonie [From General De Gaulle 

to Macron, when the president of the Republic visits Caledonia]. 

  France Info. 

https://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/nouvellecaledonie/du-general-de-gaulle-a-

  macron-quand-le-president-de-la-republique-visite-la-caledonie-141560

0.html

Trump, D. J. (2017). National Security Strategy of the United States of 

  America. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1043812.pdf

U.S. Embassy Beirut. (2022, December 2). Joint statement following the 

  meeting between President Biden and President Macron. U.S. Embassy 

in Lebanon. https://lb.usembassy.gov/joint-statement-biden-macron/

U.S. Embassy in Estonia (2021, January 25). Remarks by President Trump 

and NATO    Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg at Bilateral Breakfast - 

  U.S. Embassy in Estonia. U.S. Embassy in Estonia. 

https://ee.usembassy.gov/remarks-nato-summit/

U.S. Mission to France. (2021a, June 14). President Biden’s meeting with 

  President Macron. U.S. Embassy and Consulates in France. 

https://fr.usembassy.gov/president-bidens-meeting-with-president-macr

on/

U.S. Mission to France. (2021b, September 23). Joint Statement on the Phone 
  Call between President Biden and President Macron. U.S. Embassy 

and Consulates in France. 

https://fr.usembassy.gov/joint-statement-on-the-phone-call-between-pre

sident-biden-and-president-macron/

Vaissié, E. (2025, March 16). Sous-marins australiens : France trahie, fiasco 

américain, regrets de Canberra. . . retour sur l’affaire en 4 actes 

[Australian submarines: France betrayed, American fiasco, Canberra’s 

regrets... a look back at the affair in 4 acts]. La Dépêche. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118

https://www.ladepeche.fr/2025/03/16/sous-marins-australiens-france-tra

hie-fiasco-americain-regrets-de-canberra-retour-sur-laffaire-en-4-actes-

12568206.php

Vazquez, M. (2019, December 4). Trump abruptly cancels NATO news 

conference as anger boils over. CNN Politics. 

https://edition.cnn.com/2019/12/04/politics/donald-trump-nato-day-two

-london/index.html

Vazquez, M. (2021a, September 17). Why France is angry about the US and 

  UK giving Australia nuclear-powered submarines. CNN Politics. 

https://edition.cnn.com/2021/09/17/politics/france-anger-over-nuclear-p

owered-submarines-explained/index.html

Vazquez, M. (2021b, October 29). Biden tells French President the US was 

‘clumsy’ in handling nuclear submarine deal. CNN Politics. 

https://edition.cnn.com/2021/10/29/politics/macron-biden-meeting-rom

e/index.html

Vazquez, M., & Malloy, A. (2019, December 4). Macron refuses to back 

down  after Trump  attack. CNN Politics. 

https://edition.cnn.com/2019/12/03/politics/donald-trump-nato/index.ht

  ml

Wasson, G. (2024). Perspective Chapter: Brexit, Emmanuel Macron and the 

  Resurgence of the Europe puissance. 

Welc, H. (2023). Macron in praise of folly? How Macron’s France seeks to 

gain from power vacuum during the war in Ukraine. Bezpieczeństwo. 

Teoria i Praktyka, 52(3), 117-129. 

The White House. (2017a, February 6). Press Gaggle by Press Secretary Sean 

Spicer en route JBA. The White House. 

https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/press-gaggle

-press-secretary-sean-spicer-en-route-jba/

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119

The White House. (2017b, February 8). Press briefing by Press Secretary 

Sean Spicer. The White House. 

https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/press-briefin

g-press-secretary-sean-spicer-020817/

The White House. (2017c, July 6). Remarks by President Trump to the People 

of Poland. The White House. 

https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-pre

sident-trump-people-poland/

The White House. (2018, May 17). President Donald J. Trump Hosts NATO 

Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg at the White House. The White 

  House. 

https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/president-do

nald-j-trump-hosts-nato-secretary-general-jens-stoltenberg-white-house/

The White House. (2019, April 2). Remarks by President Trump and NATO 

Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg Before Bilateral Meeting. The 

  White House. 

https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-pre

sident-trump-nato-secretary-general-jens-stoltenberg-bilateral-meeting/

The White House. (2021a, January 24). Readout of President Joseph R. Biden, 

Jr. Call with President Emmanuel Macron of France. The White 

  House. 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases

/2021/01/24/readout-of-president-joseph-r-biden-jr-call-with-president-

emmanuel-macron-of-france/

The White House. (2021b, February 15). Readout of Vice President Kamala 
  Harris Call with President Emmanuel Macron of France. The White 

  House. 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120

/2021/02/15/readout-of-vice-president-kamala-harris-call-with-presiden

t-emmanuel-macron-of-france/

The White House. (2021c, August 31). Remarks by President Biden on the 

  End of the War in Afghanistan. The White House. 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/

2021/08/31/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-end-of-the-war-in-afgha

nistan/

The White House. (2022a, February 9). Readout of President Joseph R. Biden, 

Jr.’s Call with President Emmanuel Macron of France. The White 

  House. 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases

/2022/02/09/readout-of-president-joseph-r-biden-jr-s-call-with-presiden

t-emmanuel-macron-of-france-4/

The White House. (2022b, February 15). Readout of President Biden’s Call 
  with President Emmanuel Macron of France. The White House. 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases

/2022/02/15/readout-of-president-bidens-call-with-president-emmanuel-

  macron-of-france/

World Bank. (2025). Military expenditure (% of GDP) - France. World Bank 

  Open Data. 

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/MS.MIL.XPND.GD.ZS?locations=

FR

Wyne, A. (2019, February 19). Can America remain number one? The 

  National Interest. 

https://nationalinterest.org/feature/can-america-remain-number-one-446

27

Yochai, J. (2025, March 17). To improve its Sahel policy, the US must update 

four assumptions. Atlantic Council.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121

https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/africasource/to-improve-its-sahel

-policy-the-us-must-update-four-assumptions/

Ziemke, E. F. (1975). The US Army in the Occupation of Germany, 

1944-1946. Center of Military History, United States Army. 

 
 
 
122

Appendix

Comparison of keyword frequencies in the 2015, 2017 and 2022 National 

Security Strategies

Key word

Obama (2015)

Trump (2017)

Biden (2022)

TABLE 1

Al-Qaeda/Al-Qa’ida

Asia, Asian(s)

China, PRC, 

Chinese

Competition, 

competitor(s), 

competitive, 

competitiveness, 

compete

Democracy(ies), 

democratic

Europe, 

European(s)

France, French

9

29

15

10

45

21

1

9

17

38

57

28

29

0

3

9

57

102

99

35

1

123

11

11

3

9

Iran, Iranian(s)

ISIS, Islamic State

North Korea, North 

Korean(s), DPRK

NATO, North 

Atlantic Treaty 

Organization, 

transatlantic 

(security, 

partnership etc.)

Russia, Russian(s), 

15

Russian Federation

Syria (civil war)

Terrorism, 

terrorist(s)

Threat(s), threaten

Ukraine, 

Ukrainian(s)

War(s), warfare, 

warfighting

1

37

53

7

15

17

12

16

6

25

6

70

110

1

39

7

2

3

19

71

3

37

69

33

31

