1 

THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

STATE BUDGETARY HIGHER EDUCATION UNIT 

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY 

                                                «HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS» 

                             FACULTY OF WORLD ECONOMY AND WORLD POLITICS 

International Program 'International Relations and Global Studies' 

Thesis Paper 

On the topic: 

«Features of the United Nations Communication Strategy for Sustainable Development Goals 

(2015–2024) » 

By the student 

of the 4th year, 

        group 212, 

Kopnina Ekaterina Dmitrievna 

Scientific supervisor: 

Nicole Bodishteanu Vitalievna, 

PhD, Deputy Academic Supervisor 

 IRGS Programme 

MOSCOW 2025 

 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

2 

Introduction ..............................................................................................................3 

Chapter 1 Origins and Evolution of UN Communication Strategies ...................18 

1.1 The role of communication in development...............................................18 

1.2 Overview of UN communication strategies prior to 2015 (MDGs era) ...21 

1.3 The role of communication in achieving the 17 SDGs ..............................24 

1.4 Channels of communication used by the United Nations used in 

promoting SDGs .................................................................................................26 

Chapter 2 Content Analysis of UN Reports and Social Media .............................29 

2.1 Content analysis of UN Communication strategy: methodology .............29 

2.2 Content analysis of UN Communication strategy: results .......................35 

2.3 Content analysis of UN Communication strategy: evaluation of results 40 

Chapter 3 Evaluation of Strategic Features through Case Studies ......................44 

3.1 Case study research......................................................................................44 

3.2 Case study 1 Tell Everyone (2015) ..............................................................47 

3.3 Case study 2 Choose Life (2020) .................................................................50 

3.4 Case study 3 Halftime (2023) ......................................................................54 

3.5 Comparative analysis ...................................................................................58 

3.6 Political recommendations ..........................................................................62 

Conclusion ..............................................................................................................64 

Reference List .........................................................................................................69 

 
3 

Introduction 

Relevance 

With 17 sustainable development goals, the UN unveiled a new, ambitious 

agenda in September 2015. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are the 

forerunners  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs),  which  were 

announced  in  September  2000  as  part  of  the  United  Nations  Millennium 

Declaration.  Under  the  "Transforming  Our  World:  The  2030  Agenda  for 

Sustainable  Development"  framework,  the  United  Nations  approved  the 

Sustainable Development Goals, also known as the Global Goals, in 2015 with 

the aim of promoting equality, prosperity, and peace. There are 169 goals in all, 

spanning the social, economic, and environmental domains.  

Around the globe, individuals, organisations, and governments are starting 

to  place  an  increased  value  on  sustainability.  Thus,  effective  sustainability 

communication is more crucial than ever. Strategic communication is an integral 

part of the mentioned above international sustainable agenda. It is an approach 

which allows to distribute information via various sources as well as ensure that 

the information is received by the required group. Communicating sustainability 

is a vital step in achieving the SDG agenda by raising awareness. Understanding 

the crucial role that communication plays in achieving the 2030 Agenda and the 

SDGs into practice requires a closer look at the 2030 Agenda for SD. Even while 

the 2030 Agenda as a whole doesn't specifically address communication or how 

the UN or its UN Member States should go about spreading the 2030 Agenda and 

the  SDGs,  it  is  nevertheless  possible  to  infer  messages  of  communication. 

Sustainability communication is a powerful instrument for promoting meaningful 

change, as Thomas (2023) observes. 

 
 
 
 
4 

In order to effectively promote the SDGs, it is crucial to fully comprehend 

the advantages of connecting them to local issues and coordinating national and 

subnational  plans  with  the  2030  Agenda.  This  is  particularly  important  when 

policymakers are the intended audience. In contrast, it is also important to make 

the  message  of  SDGs  universal  and  unified,  in  order  to  create  an  integrated 

environment. Therefore, communication strategy is crucial for the UN to achieve 

its 2030 objectives. “Communicating about the SDGs and building awareness is a 

critical  initial  and  ongoing  step  in  the  successful  implementation  of  the  2030 

Agenda for Sustainable Development”1, (European Environmental Bureau, 2020). 

It  also  makes  it  easier to  develop  the  knowledge,  decision-making,  and action-

capabilities  that  are  essential  to  the  delicate  collaboration  between  the 

stakeholders.  

In  its  landmark  resolution  72/279,  the  General  Assembly  decided  to 

fundamentally restructure the UN development system to better achieve the 2030 

Agenda for Sustainable Development. It focuses on “repositioning of the United 

Nations  development  system  in  the  context  of  the  quadrennial  comprehensive 

policy review of operational activities for development2”. It strives towards a more 

coordinated  strategy.  This  would  entail  cooperative  advocacy,  coordinated 

communications, and complete accountability and transparency of results.  This 

shows that communication strategy is being altered, and does not stay the same in 

comparison to the SDGs.  

The  challenges  posed  by  the  United  Nations'  new  agenda  test  the 

effectiveness of an international organization's current structure and call for a re-

evaluation of communication strategies.  Thus, it is of high importance to analyse 

the  evolution  of  communication  strategy  of  the  SDGs  and  its  influence  on  the 

1

 European Environmental Bureau, . (2020). Sustainable Development Handbook. Retrieved from: 
https://www.sdgwatcheurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/7-Communicating-about-the-SDGs.pdf 
2 United Nations General Assembly. (2018, May 31). Repositioning of the United Nations development system in the context of 
the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development (A/RES/72/279). United Nations. 
https://undocs.org/en/A/RES/72/279 

 
 
 
achievements  of  the  objectives  set.  Tools,  methods  and  transforms  have  to  be 

thoroughly  considered  when  examining  the  sustainability  communication 

5 

strategy.  

Literature Review 

This  literature  review  examines  key  research  and  publications  related  to 

communication  of  sustainable  development.  One  of  the  relevant  pieces  of 

literature is called “Communication and awareness raising in the implementation 

of the 2030 agenda and the SDGs: Activities and challenges” by Mullholland et.al 

(2017).  The 

literature 

investigates 

the  United  Nations'  activities  and 

communication methods used to promote the sustainable development agenda and 

what challenges the UN faces while implementing them. The article analyses sic 

specific  cases  of  communication  and  awareness-raising  techniques.  The  author 

comes  to  a  conclusion  that  to  effectively  reach  diverse  stakeholders,  countries 

should  combine  personalized  communication  with  broader  awareness-raising 

efforts, ensuring the SDGs are contextualized at national and subnational levels to 

make  them  more  relatable  and  impactful.  Moreover,  the  article  by  Lim  (2022) 

called  “The  sustainability  pyramid:  A  hierarchical  approach  to  greater 

sustainability  and  the  United  Nations  sustainable  development  goals  with 

implications  for  marketing  theory,  practice,  and  public  policy”  analyses  the 

communication  strategy  of  the  UN  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs) 

agenda,  focussing  on  rethinking  methods  for  marketing  and  communicating 

sustainability while suggesting innovative approaches. The article originates from 

the  field  of  sustainable  development  studies.  The  main  argument  issue  of  the 

research  is  the  public's  ignorance  regarding  the  threat  of  unsustainable 

consumption.  Consequently, the author presents a novel approach to conveying 

sustainability. The author argues that the 2030 agenda is unlikely to be achieved, 

particularly in Asia and the Pacific, highlighting the detrimental impact of Covid-

19 on the attainment of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Concepts 

 
 
6 

such as sustainable development and communication strategies are widely used 

and well-defined. The author's qualitative research orientation provides a practical 

solution to the issue. The author primarily employs the conceptual method, which 

thoroughly evaluates established concepts and theories before introducing his own 

theory.  The  author  presents  a  theory  termed  “The  Sustainability  Pyramid,”  a 

model that introduces innovative approaches to sustainability. Marketing efforts 

should  convey  messages  in  a  hierarchical  order:  economic,  social,  and 

environmental sustainability. This will modify the marketing message, enhancing 

the appeal of sustainability to consumers by emphasising the economic benefits 

of the initiative. The strength of the following article is that it provides a practical 

solution as well as the novelty of the theory offered. As for the limitations, it has 

a narrow scope since it focuses mainly on consumers thus contributing solely to 

SDG 12 and potentially oversimplifying the concept of sustainable development. 

Moreover,  the  article  “Crisis  Communication  vs.  United  Nation  Sustainable 

Development Goals: The 7S Paradigm as Feasible Solution Facilitator” by Looser 

et.al (2019). The literature looks at the interaction between the UN Sustainable 

Development  Goals  (SDGs)  and  various  industries  through  a  communication 

perspective.  The  study  proposes  the  "7S(-stakeholder)  Paradigm,"  which 

emphasises  communication  on  many  levels.  The  framework  provides  practical 

instructions  for  managing  stakeholder  communications  across  the  commercial, 

public,  and  third  sectors,  with  adaptive  decision-tree  architectures  for  diverse 

conflict scenarios. Another noteworthy piece is the article by Janoušková et al. 

(2019)  named  “Sustainable  development—A  poorly  communicated  concept  by 

mass  media.  Another  challenge  for  SDGs?”,  which  examines  the  theme  of 

communicating  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  through  mass  media 

sources,  emphasising  the ineffectiveness  of these  outlets.  The  articles  originate 

from  sustainability  and  media  studies.  The  primary  dilemma  presented  in  the 

article is that sustainability is inadequately communicated, and the communicative 

potential of predominantly English-speaking outlets is underutilised. Janoušková 

et al. (2019) highlights that despite sustainable development being internationally 

7 

recognised, it did not become appealing to many. One of the main arguments of 

the article is that scientists and educators, as well as politicians, play a critical role 

in  the  development  of  appropriate  narratives  and  the  provision  of  dependable 

information  to  the  media.  The  author  uses  a  qualitative  research  orientation  to 

analyse communication strategies. The methodology being used by the authors is 

the  one  of  content  analysis,  particularly  analysis  of  published  media,  mainly 

newspapers.  By  analysing  content,  the  authors  look  into  newspaper  articles 

covering sustainability themes in an implicit way and those explicitly linking them 

to the overarching sustainability concept. The aim of the research is to provide 

holistic insights on how to better communicate sustainability through mass media 

sources.  One  of  the  main  advantages  of  the  following  study  is  that  empirical 

evidence is used to analyse communication strategies of sustainable development, 

providing insights from mass media over the past ten years. The disadvantages of 

the article is the fact that content analysis is carried out solely on English speaking 

media, meaning that research has a limited scope and does not use a full spectrum 

of  global  media.  The  article  “The  impact  of  the  United  Nations  Sustainable 

Development Goals on corporate sustainability reporting” by Whittingham et.al 

(2023) is a good addition to the research. A notable emphasis on the institutional 

forces influencing sustainability reporting is seen in the literature. Research has 

looked into how corporate environmental practices are influenced by normative 

demands.  Similar  to  this,  studies  have  shown  that  institutional  and  regional 

contexts are important factors in influencing how businesses react to sustainability 

communication.  Methodological  precedent  for  examining  large-scale  corporate 

communications has been established by research that has used computer-aided 

text analysis to investigate shifts in corporate sustainability discourse. Therefore, 

this  literature  looks  at  communication  of  SDGs  from  a  corporate  scope. 

Furthermore,  the  article  under  the  name  “Communication  for  sustainable 

development:  applications  and  challenges”  by  Mefalopulos  (2005).  The  author 

highlights 

that  sustainable  development  encompasses 

three  dimensions: 

environment,  rural  development,  and  social issues,  with  poverty  reduction  as  a 

8 

central concern. Fostering empowerment and participation, the two primary pillars 

of  sustainable  development,  requires  effective  communication.  Mefalopulos 

highlights  that  engaging  stakeholder  in  decision-making  processes  requires 

participatory communication as opposed to top-down methods. He does point out 

that  participation's  promise  is  undermined  by  frequent  abuse  and  uneven 

application.  The  Participatory  Rural  Communication  Appraisal  (PRCA) 

methodology, which empowers communities by fusing communication strategies 

with participatory approaches, is also covered in the paper. Mefalopulos comes to 

the conclusion that in order to improve the efficacy and durability of development 

programs,  communication  should  be  incorporated  from  the  very  beginning. 

Building  trust,  exchanging  knowledge,  and  making  sure  that  stakeholders' 

viewpoints are truly taken into account are the ultimate goals of communication 

for  sustainable  development.  The  article  “Communicating  sustainability:  An 

analysis  of  the  2017  United  Nations  sustainable  development  goals  report”  by 

Franson (2018) analyses communication strategy based on content analysis of the 

UN report, this method will be employed in the following research as well. The 

scholar  analyses 

the  UN's  Sustainable  Development  Goals 

(SDGs) 

communication  strategy  to  get  a  better  understanding  of  their  contribution  to 

sustainable development. The SDGs, which were first introduced in 2015, provide 

a refreshed agenda for global development from 2015 to 2030 and are modelled 

after the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). This study looks at how the 

SDGs  are  presented  in  the  2017  SDG  Report,  emphasising  important  topics 

including framing analysis, cultural aspects, and knowledge translation. The SDG 

Report  summarises  accomplishments  and 

identifies  areas 

that 

require 

development, acting as a knowledge translation tool. However, issues including 

language hurdles, lack of internet connection, and disparities in cultural beliefs 

restrict  its  usefulness  and  accessibility.  In  order  to  improve  the  worldwide 

adoption  of  sustainable  practices,  suggestions  are  made  to  improve  the 

communication  strategy  while  guaranteeing  inclusion  and  cultural  sensitivity. 

Another noteworthy piece of literature for the given research is the journal article 

9 

“Communication  for  all  and  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals”  written  by 

McLeod & Marshall (2023). It has 36 studies that examine how different global 

issues,  such  as  poverty,  hunger,  health,  education,  employment,  innovation, 

climate  change,  urban  development,  terrestrial  and  marine  ecosystems,  justice, 

and  international  partnerships,  may  be  addressed  by  effective  communication 

techniques. In addition to being a basic human right, the collection highlights how 

important communication is for promoting sustainable development in a variety 

of fields. The article promotes inclusive and participatory methods that empower 

communities  and  stakeholders  globally  by  including  communication  into  the 

SDGs  framework.    Another  work  which  would  be  relevant  for  the  following 

literature review is named “From Millennium Development Goals to Sustainable 

Development Goals: Transforming development communication to sustainability 

communication” by Kannengießer (2023). The scholar explores the move from 

the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  to  the  Sustainable  Development 

Goals (SDGs) and its implications for development communication. It makes the 

case that the change from the MDGs to the SDGs represents a basic paradigm shift 

away from conventional ideas of development and towards frameworks that are 

more  concerned  with  sustainability.  The  authors  stress  that  this  transformation 

calls  for  a  reinterpretation  of  development  communication  in  terms  of 

sustainability  communication,  which  combines  the  objectives  of  sustainability 

with  the  concepts  of  social  change  communication.  The  paper  emphasises  the 

significance of embracing sustainability communication as a specialised discipline 

within larger communication for social change by looking at the development of 

these  global  aims.  It  implies  that  the  overall  goal  of  advancing  sustainable 

development may be better aligned with communication practices through the use 

of effective sustainability communication. In the end, the paper promotes a more 

focused  strategy  in  which  communication  initiatives  are  specifically  linked  to 

sustainability goals, increasing their applicability and influence. Another chapter 

from the book “The sustainability communication reader” will be applicable for 

the research. The chapter “Sustainability Communication as Critical Perspective 

10 

in Media and Communication Studies—an Introduction” by Weder at.al (2021). 

The  chapter  presents  sustainability  communication  as  a  crucial,  emerging  field 

within media and communication studies. In light of overlapping issues like the 

COVID-19 epidemic and associated socioeconomic difficulties, it recognises the 

need of tackling the climate catastrophe. According to the authors, sustainability 

acts as a moral compass that directs behaviour at the institutional, organisational, 

community, and individual levels in order to promote a regenerative connection 

between people and the natural world. The essay also makes a distinction between 

communication about, about, and for sustainability, highlighting the unique roles 

that each strategy plays in furthering the conversation about sustainability. It also 

emphasises  how  important  it  is  to  question  the  dominant  growth-oriented 

paradigm and promotes more open dialogue regarding de-growth and alternative 

frameworks. The article's overall goal is to position sustainable communication as 

a young area with adaptable limits, encouraging more research and development 

in the field of media and communication studies. To add, the piece of literature 

which discusses the role of digital technologies “Information and communications 

technologies  for  sustainable  development  goals:  state-of-the-art,  needs  and 

perspectives”  by  Wu.et  al  (2018).  The  writers  look  at  how  ICTs  support 

sustainable development's social, economic, and environmental pillars. The study 

finds through a thorough literature assessment that the majority of contributions 

from  reputable  research  communities,  such  as  IEEE  and  ACM,  are  primarily 

technical and lack a more comprehensive social good viewpoint. A major research 

gap  in  integrating  ICTs  into  comprehensive  sustainability  frameworks  is 

highlighted by this limited focus on technology solutions. To effectively use ICTs 

to  achieve  the  SDGs  by  2030,  the  authors  promote  increased  awareness  and 

creative  thinking.  In  order  to  fully  use  ICTs'  potential  to  support  sustainable 

development,  they  stress  the  necessity  of  bridging  technological  breakthroughs 

with  thorough  social  and  environmental  issues,  eventually  advocating  for 

multidisciplinary collaboration. Furthermore, the book “The Palgrave handbook 

of international communication and sustainable development” written by Yusha'u 

11 

& Servaes (2021) brings insights into the following literature review. According 

to  the  handbook,  good  communication  is  crucial  to  the  SDGs'  successful 

implementation  and  should  be  acknowledged  as  a  key  element  of  the  2030 

Agenda.  It  critically  assesses  the  present  SDG  framework  and  schedule  while 

reflecting on issues like the COVID-19 epidemic and highlighting the need for 

strong  communication  infrastructures.  The  chapters  seek  to  enhance  the 

conversation  on  development  communication  and  suggest  crucial  policy 

initiatives through unique SDG analysis and case studies tailored to a particular 

nation.  The  given  book  would  come  at  use  as  a  prime  example  for  the  third 

chapter,  which  deals  with  case  studies.  The  article  “Sustainable  development 

goals: conceptualization, communication and achievement synergies in a complex 

network framework” by Bellantuono et al. (2022) examines how the perception of 

SDGs influences their progress and achievements. The authors build a three-layer 

multiplex network, with each layer representing a link between the SDGs based 

on  accomplishment 

indicators,  communication  patterns,  and  conceptual 

commonalities.  The  analysis  finds  strategic  SDGs  that  are  essential  in  various 

settings  by  looking  at  centrality  within  these  networks.  The  substantial 

relationship  between  SDG  success  patterns  and 

their  perception  and 

communication,  as  demonstrated  by  social  network  data,  is  a  noteworthy 

discovery. This implies that public opinion and conversation may either impact or 

be  impacted  by  the  advancement  of  particular  SDGs.  The  study  offers  a 

framework  for  comprehending  the  intricate  relationships  between  the  SDGs, 

providing information that may help build decision support tools for creating and 

carrying  out  successful  sustainability  plans.  Another  article  “The  role  of 

sustainability in media and communication studies' curricula throughout Europe” 

by  Karmasin  &  Voci  (2021)  discusses  the  pivotal  role  of  media  in  sustainable 

development.  Article  shows  that  Only  14%  of  the  curriculum  incorporates 

sustainability elements, according to research that examined 1,068 bachelor's and 

master's  degree  programs  from  28  different  nations.  Because  of  this  lack  of 

integration, sustainability is still mostly a guiding concept rather than a specific 

12 

course  offering.  The  results  urge  consideration  of  the  social  and  pedagogical 

obligations  of  higher  education  institutions and  draw  attention to  difficulties  in 

operationalising sustainability within media and communication courses. While 

some universities do incorporate sustainability, the study finds that these are often 

done  through  voluntary  rather  than  required  classes.  Furthermore,  the  study 

indicates 

that 

the  absence  of 

institutional  commitment  and  a  clear 

operationalisation  of  sustainability  principles  impede  integration  attempts. 

Finally,  the  article,  “Can  social  media  improve  stakeholder  engagement  and 

communication of Sustainable Development Goals? A cross-country analysis” by 

De Luca et.al (2022). It explores how social media, particularly Twitter, influences 

stakeholder  engagement  with  the  United  Nations’  17  Sustainable  Development 

Goals (SDGs). The study uses a dataset of 3,045 tweets from 173 companies in 19 

European countries. Posts are categorised by level of participation using the Chi-

square Automatic Interaction Detection (CHAID) approach. The findings show 

that engagement rates are greatly impacted by several tweet attributes, including 

content type, hashtags, links, word count, industry type, and the firm's nationality. 

The  highest  levels  of involvement  are  generated  by  SDGs  pertaining to  gender 

equality, partnerships, climate action, reduced inequality, life on land, life below 

water,  and  decreased  inequality.  This  is  the  first  study  to  evaluate  how 

corporations' communication of particular SDGs affects stakeholder participation 

on social media. It emphasises how crucial well-crafted messaging is to fostering 

better stakeholder engagement and communication on sustainability goals. 

Primary  sources  include  UN  SDG  annual  reports,  official  campaign 

materials, and social media posts, which provide direct data. 

Research gap 

The following research will fill a research gap by analysing the social media 

outlets used by the United Nations for communication. Previous studies mostly 

examined paper-based media, rather than social apps. Such an approach was not 

 
seen in earlier literature, demonstrating its uniqueness and novelty. Social media 

posts  will  allow  us  to  track  the  progress  from  a  direct  source  (UN).  

13 

This methodological innovation tackles not just the current change in institutional 

communication, but also gives real-time insights into the UN's public engagement 

techniques, considerably adding to the existing body of knowledge in international 

communications research. 

Research Question 

The research question is as follows: "How have the features of the United 

Nations'  communication  strategy  evolved  in  the  context  of  the  Sustainable 

Development Goals agenda from 2015 to 2024?". 

Hypothesis 

The hypothesis will have a two-levelled approach. 1)The hypothesis is that 

the UN's communication strategy will go through digitalization as a foundational 

communication  medium  to  enhance  global  reach  and  accessibility.  2)  The 

characteristics of communication strategy will change.  Shifting towards global 

awareness and residing knowledge about newly introduced SDGs from 2015 to 

2017, 2018 to 2021 was described by increasing reach, engagement and support 

in the period of a global health crisis and from 2022 up to 2024 UN concentrated 

on localised issues and overall led a localised approach.  

Methodology 

As the basis for the IR theory of the following research liberalism will be 

considered  as  a  foundation.  Liberal  thought  best  explains  the  need  for  a 

communication strategy in sustainable development because the core principles 

of the theory are completely in line with the way the SDGs are promoted globally, 

 
 
 
 
 
14 

particularly  its  emphasis  on  many  stakeholders,  open  information  exchange, 

transparency,  and  institutional  cooperation.  The  theory's  emphasis  on  absolute 

gains  over  relative  gains  helps  us  understand  why  the  communication  strategy 

focuses  on  collective  benefits  and  shared  prosperity  rather  than  competitive 

advantages. Through this theoretical lens, we may better understand how the SDG 

communication strategy functions as a vehicle for establishing global alliances, 

developing international consensus, and encouraging cooperation—all of which 

are  crucial  for  accomplishing  the  goals  of  sustainable  development.  However, 

while looking at SDGs from idealism some criticise them for being too idealistic. 

A common criticism of idealism in international relations is that it is a utopian 

philosophy.  The  strategy  may  appear  overly  optimistic  about  the  capacity  of 

international  organizations  to  coordinate  messaging  effectively  across  diverse 

cultural, political, and economic contexts. However, despite criticism, liberalism's 

emphasis  on  international  institutions  provides  a  practical  mechanism  for 

coordinating global action on complex challenges like sustainable development 

through  institutionalism.  According  to  Keohane  and  Nye  (1977),  international 

institutions play a critical role in promoting cooperation and stability by reducing 

information asymmetries, fostering transparency, and building trust among states.  

As for the methodology of the research, to examine the development of UN 

communication  strategies,  the  suggested  methodology  takes  a  thorough  three-

sided approach which will employ both qualitative and quantitative methods.  

A comprehensive content analysis will be carried out to look at UN digital 

platforms and communication materials from 2015 to 2024.  This will also include 

analysis of posts posted by the UN on various media platforms and formal, official 

documents. Examining documents and social media postings, the website will be 

part  of  the  content  analysis  process  in  order  to  spot  trends  and  changes  in 

communication  tactics  of  SDGs.  We  shall  be  able  to  examine  how  the  UN's 

language evolves throughout the designated time frame thanks to the study. This 

will  be  a  mixture  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  methods,  since  firstly  marker 

15 

words will be counted and only then interpreted to trace any specific patterns. The 

data will be secluded to desk research and collected from open sources such as the 

UN website and relevant literature. The disadvantage of the method is that not all 

documents related to this topic will be in full access or the data will be published 

implicitly, which will make data collection lengthier.  

Secondly, case studies will be employed to examine how the UN presents 

itself in the global environment and what kind of message it transfers. These case 

studies will investigate how global messaging was adapted to address local needs 

and cultural sensitivities, analyzing specific examples of regional communication 

campaigns and their effectiveness. This component will help understand how the 

UN  balanced  maintaining  consistent  global  messaging  while  accommodating 

local  contexts  and  stakeholder  needs.  The  case  studies  will  include  detailed 

examinations  of  communication  strategies  from  different  time  periods  and 

touching various subjects to make the investigation space broader. 3 campaigns 

from  various  time  periods  will  be  picked  to  create  a  wide  spectrum  of 

representation.  Thirdly,  comparative  analysis  will  be  carried  out  to  trace 

similarities  and  differences  between  the  three  campaigns  which  will  allow  to 

tracks the evolution of features on a deeper scale. The drawback of this message 

is that despite the broad choice of campaigns, some campaigns will be excluded 

due to the word limit of the research, which will narrow down the knowledge.  

The expected outcome will be a comprehensive analysis of UN's evolving 

features of communication strategies from 2015 to 2024, with particular focus on 

social media engagement. This research will uniquely contribute to the field by 

providing real-time features of the UN's sustainability communication strategy.  

The time frame is between 2015 and 2024. It starts with 2015 because the 

SDG agenda was announced during the year, while 2024 is a midpoint of the 2030 

agenda,  which  captures  nearly  a  decade  of  SDG  progress.  Also,  2024  is  the 

maximum present time which is available for analysis.  

 
16 

The object of the following research is the United Nations’ communication 

strategy in the sustainable development field. The subject is features and evolution 

of the communication strategy in the time frame 2015 to 2024.  

As  for  the  limitations  of  the  research  paper,  the  information  about 

communication strategies may be concealed, which will make it more difficult to 

gather data and infer information from publicly published sources. Furthermore, 

another  limitation  is  the  time  constraint  applied  to  this  research;  the  deadline 

should be met under a time framework 

  The  aim  of  this  research  is  to  examine  how  the  features  of  the  United 

Nations’  communication  strategy  have  evolved  in  the  context  of  the  Sustainable 

Development Goals (SDGs) from 2015 to 2024. The objectives of the research are: 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Conduct historical background analysis 

Identify role of communication in achieving SDGs  

Perform content analysis of UN reports and social media 

Identify key patterns in content analysis using marker words  

Select three UN campaigns and carry out case studies  

Compare case studies of three UN campaigns 

Provide political recommendations based on findings 

Structure 

The  structure  of  the  research  will  look  as  follows:  it  will  start  with  an 

introduction  (relevance,  literature  review,  research  question  and  hypothesis, 

research gap, methodology, and structure), which is being read now. Overall, the 

following research will be written in three chapters. The first chapter will discuss 

the general background of the UN’s communication strategy of sustainability. The 

following topics will be discussed to present and through context of the research: 

the  role  of  communication  in  global  governance  and  sustainable  development, 

overview of UN communication strategies prior to 2015 (MDGs agenda), the role 

 
17 

of  communication  in  achieving  the  17  SDGs  and,  finally  the  evolving  role  of 

digital media and technology in UN communication.  The second chapter will deal 

with content analysis. UN digital platforms as well as documents will be analysed, 

and the evolution of communication methods and features will be identified. In 

the third chapter, the case studies of 3 different UN campaigns regarding SDG 

from 3 different time periods will be analysed. Through this process major patterns 

will  be  spotted,  including  both  evolution  of  communication  channels  and  its 

characteristics.  After  that,  the  hypothesis  will  either  be  validated  or  disproved. 

Other prepositions will be provided in the case of refusal. The conclusion at the 

end will provide a summary to sum up the study and outline all the main arguments 

of the research. 

Approaching the criteria of my research, the indicators which will be taken 

into  account  during  the  research  are  relevance,  reliability  and  originality.  By 

emphasising the  UN's  initiatives  to advance  the  SDGs  through many  platforms 

and  its  effect  on  stakeholders, relevance is attained.  The  use  of  official  papers, 

reports,  and  analysis  of  social  media  of the UN  analysis  guaranteed  reliability. 

Consistent approach across all years of study is necessary for reliability. The study 

also  places  a  high  value  on  uniqueness,  offering  new  perspectives  on  strategic 

communication changes between 2015 and 2024, especially by analysing social 

media posts.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
18 

Chapter 1 Origins and Evolution of UN Communication Strategies 

1.1 The role of communication in development 

Sustainable development in the following research will be referred to as a 

concept defined by the Brundtland report, “development that meets the needs of 

the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their 

own needs”3 (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987).  

After defining the main concept, the role of communication in sustainable 

development and development will be discussed in detail. Communication in the 

sustainable  development  field  fosters  collaboration,  spreads  awareness  and 

encourages behavioural changes. The exchange of information through dialogue 

enables inclusive  policies  which  also  supports  educational  initiatives that teach 

people sustainable decision-making skills. Firstly, it is vital to achieve a common 

understanding of sustainable communication before assessing the general role of 

communication.  It  can  be  described  as  “the  sharing  of  knowledge  aimed  at 

reaching  a  consensus for  action  that takes into  account  the  interests,  needs and 

capacities  of  all  concerned”  (Servaes,  2003)4.  Previously  development 

communication  was  explained,  however  it  is  also  important  to  understand  the 

concept  of  sustainable  communication.  For  the  definition  of  sustainable 

communication, we can refer to Kannengießer (2021). According to the scholar 

sustainable  communication  is  “all  communicative  practices,  mediated  or  non-

mediated,  which  deal  with  any  aspect  of  sustainability  (either  related  to  the 

ecological,  economic  and/or  social  dimension)”.  5  Hence,  there  is  a  contrast 

between the two. Sustainable communication takes a more holistic approach rather 

3 WCED, S. W. S. (1987). World commission on environment and development. Our common future, 17(1), 1-91. 
4 Servaes, J. (2003). Approaches to Development Communication. Paris: UNESCO. Available at: 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000135752 
5 Kannengießer, S. (2021). Media reception, media effects and media practices in sustainability communication: 
State of research and research gaps. The Sustainability Communication Reader: A Reflective Compendium, 323-338. 

 
 
 
19 

than development communication. It Integrates insights from various fields such 

as  environmental  science,  communication  studies,  sociology,  economics,  and 

politics. Sustainable communication goes along with the SDG agenda, placing a 

focus on the accomplishment of the needs of current generations and future ones.  

Before  the  2015  UN  agenda  was  revealed,  communication  was  also 

important for development. The earliest paradigms in the modernisation theory. 

As one of the earlier scholars Schramm (1964) underlines that communication is 

an extremely powerful tool in promoting communication in developing countries. 

In  other  words,  it  was  a  driver  in  the  modernization  processes.  Schramm  the 

proponent  of  the  theory  that  communication  outlets  such  as  radio,  television, 

newspapers, and films can be used to deliver specific messages which in return 

will  lead  to  modernisation.  Looking  from  the  scope  of  development  and 

underdevelopment, 

countries  which 

lack  development  usually  have 

underdeveloped  systems  of  communication,  and  the  other  way  round.  Role  of 

media is  quite  significant for this  theory,  however  the  criticism  of it can  be its 

Eurocentric approach. However, despite it being written nearly 50 years before 

the  announcements  of  sustainable  development  goals  in  2015  it  still  can  bring 

insights  into  why  communication  is  a  driver  of  SDG  achievements.  This 

modernisation paradigm aims at spreading the values of developed countries with 

a “top-down” manner through various media outlets.  

The  second  approach  is  the  dependency  paradigm.  The  modernisation 

paradigm  came  under  growing  criticism  in  the  1970s  for  a  number  of  reasons, 

including the fact that it expected progress to follow a constant, clearly defined 

linear sequence and ignored the importance of local social, political, and cultural 

context. Heavily influenced by Przeworski & Wallerstein’s (1982) “World system 

theory”, it became evident that comparing development between the rich and the 

poor is illogical. In this theory greater importance was granted to the state, rather 

than  more  developed  nations.  However,  still  similar  to  the  modernisation 

 
 
20 

paradigm,  the  primary  focus  was  on  mass  media,  which  were  supposed  to  be 

governed by the state, having in mind that it would act in the public's best interests. 

However, this neo-Marxist paradigm was not very successful leading to the final 

approach.  

By  the  end  of  the  20th  century  a  pivotal  turn  has  occurred  in  the 

communication of development. Thus, the third paradigm is the participatory one.  

With the rise of the internet and at the same time the movements of participatory 

development,  focused  on  local  communities  (Kannengießer,  2023).  Radio  has 

especially played a great role in communicating certain ideas, since it was one of 

the  most  reachable  media  resources.  Also,  by  2000  under  the  development 

communication  framework,  the  MDGs  were  created,  highlighting  the  need  of 

using media technology to empower people in less developed economies, which 

highlights  the  rising  participatory  approach.  As  the  world  society  is  moving 

towards  globalism,  the  interconnectedness  and  communications  intensify.  Not 

only governmental actors play an important role in communications but also non-

governmental actors. The more general idea of communication for social change 

is a more modern strategy in the field of development communication. In contrast 

to  development  communication,  which  has  frequently  been 

linked 

to 

modernisation  and  reliance,  social  change  communication  highlights  the 

significance of societal change with the goal of attaining better social justice. This 

shows that communication is of high importance in the development process.  

It is highlighted by Mulholland (2019) that the UN and the 2030 Agenda 

make it abundantly evident that the successful execution of the SDGs and the 2030 

Agenda  will  depend  heavily  on  the  role  played  by  the  state  and  national 

governments. Effective implementation of the SDGs includes communication and 

awareness-raising.  There  is  no  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  when  it  comes  to 

country’s  governments  communicating  sustainable  development.  Each  state 

operates  under  its  own  circumstances  and  focuses  on  exact  issues  which  are 

 
 
21 

nationally  relevant.  At  the  same  time  the  UN  carries  out  global  campaigns  to 

increase general knowledge and awareness of the 2030 agenda. However, despite 

communication  being  an  important  aspect,  there  are  also  other  factors  which 

influence  the  success  of  the  programme.  It  is  vital  to  understand  that 

communication is not sufficient on its own. According to Zuev, Ostrovskaya, and 

Frolova (2017), achieving sustainable development requires not only social and 

environmental  reforms  but  also  economic  prudence,  particularly  through  the 

avoidance  of  unsustainable  debt  practices.  As  Zuev,  Ostrovskaya,  and  Frolova 

(2017)  highlight  “This  untenable  level  of  borrowing  is  detrimental  to  global 

economic  growth  and  resilience,  and  must  be  addressed  if  the  international 

community  hopes  to  accomplish  the  development  goals  shared  by  the  world’s 

largest economies and the United Nations”6.  

1.2 Overview of UN communication strategies prior to 2015 (MDGs era) 

In  the  year  2000  the  United  Nations  announced  eight  millennium 

development  goals  or  MDGs  which  would  aid  less  developed  countries  to 

overcome  poverty  and  reduce  inequalities.  MDGs  were  aimed  to  eradicate 

extreme poverty and hunger, achieve universal primary education, promote gender 

equality and empower women, reduce child mortality, improve maternal health, 

combat  HIV/AIDS,  malaria,  and  other  diseases,  ensure  environmental 

sustainability,  and  develop  a  global  partnership  for  development.  While  fifteen 

years later not all of the MDGs were achieved, in 2015 the UN announced the 

sustainable development goals. The SDGs had a broader scope and contained 17 

goals and were directed not solely towards undeveloped countries but towards all 

countries  around  the  globe.  The  following  research  evidently  focuses  on  the 

features  of  communication  of  SDGs;  however,  it  is  also  crucial  to  discuss  the 

communication  strategy  of  MDGs  since  this  provides  context  and  general 

    6 Zuev, V., Ostrovskaya, E., & Frolova, E. (2017). Sustainable economy: Do not use the debt widely.            
International Organisations Research Journal, 12(4), 68-90. 

 
 
22 

background for understanding the evolution and progress in communications of 

sustainable development goals. As Van Norren (2012) points out, the millennium 

development goals turned out to be inefficient development tools, however their 

communication can be learned from and translated into the SDG agenda. Thus, an 

overview  of  UN  communication  strategies  prior  to  2015,  in  other  words  the 

millennium development era is necessary.  

As  Klaverweide  (2006)  highlights,  the  pillar  of  promoting  MDGs  was 

campaigning  and  mobilisation  that  would  raise  public  awareness  and  tackle 

ignorance. Thus, at the Secretary General's request and on the UN Development 

Group's  behalf,  the  UN  Development  Group  carried  out  the  Millennium 

Campaign. This public Millennium Campaign attempted to reach out the values 

of MDGs in order to promote the achievement of goals and their success. For this 

project  the  UN  was  responsible  for  communicating  millennium  development 

goals on three main levels: global, national and regional (or local). The United 

Nations  Development  Group  has  also  taken  part  in  communicating  the  MDGs. 

They have helped United Nations Country Teams to promote the main message 

of  the  MDG  on  a  national  level,  by  giving  their  expertise.  Eveline  Hefkins, 

originally  a  Dutch  politician,  was  appointed  executive  coordinator  for  the 

Millennium Development Goals campaign. She was also responsible for carrying 

out the UN communication strategy of the MDG agenda on a global scale.  

Campaigns are an integral part of communicating both MDGs and SDGs. It 

is one of the primary methods of communication, however other forms also exist 

such as educational programmes, reports, summits, conferences and social media 

platforms  are  all  components  of  the  communication  strategy.  Talking  about 

campaigns during the SDG era, the campaign called “Make poverty history” was 

introduced in 2005 and focused on eradicating poverty and hunger (goal number 

one on the MDG agenda). Various NGOs, celebrities, activists led a high-profile 

campaign to raise awareness of the issue. The campaign also coincided with the 

 
 
23 

G8 summit in Scotland which encouraged world leaders to cancel debt and help 

developing countries with aid. In addition to the advertising, Live 8 showcased a 

number of artists to draw in viewers. The event raised awareness of the MDGs 

and  was  a  component  of  the  "Make  Hunger  History"  campaign.  Another 

prominent campaign of the MDGs was “Every woman every child” which was 

launched  in  2010  and  specifically  addresses  millennium  development  goals 

number four and number five. It aimed at reducing child mortality and improving 

maternal health. The campaign was supported by governments, non-governmental 

organizations  (NGOs),  the  private  sector,  civil  society,  and  international 

institutions. The communication was carried out through an official website made 

specifically for this campaign, also through collaborations with organisations such 

as UNICEF, and through social media outlets. The initiative later on transformed 

into  Global  Strategy  for  Women’s,  Children’s  and  Adolescents’  Health  (2016–

2030)  under  the  SDGs  framework.  The  accountability  of  the  campaign  is 

controlled by IAP (international accountability panel), which controls reports of 

the campaign.  

Collaboration  is  another  communication  strategy.  Collaborations  can  be 

with NGOs, UN bodies or any other civil society actors. The Global Fund to Fight 

AIDS,  Tuberculosis,  and  Malaria,  or  also  known  as  the  Global  fund  was 

established in 2002 and correlated with MDG number six. Its goal is the battle 

against malaria, TB, and HIV/AIDS—three of the deadliest illnesses in the world. 

It  worked  towards  providing  global  access  to  treatment  of  the  diseases,  raising 

resources  and  awareness  on  the  topic.  It  operates  through  collaborations  at  the 

national,  regional,  and  international  levels  rather  than  directly  implementing 

initiatives. 

Thus,  it  is  evident  that  prior  to  2015,  the  main  components  of  UN 

communication  strategy  during the  MDGs  era  were traditional  media  outreach, 

high-profile  events,  cooperation  with  NGOs,  top-down  advocacy  campaigns. 

 
 
24 

MDGs were not heavily promoted on social media platforms, rather SDGs became 

highly digitalized and were communicated through various social media outlets. 

Content analysis of social media posts will be carried out in the second chapter of 

the research.  

1.3 The role of communication in achieving the 17 SDGs 

As  the  MDG  era  ended  in  2015,  the  UN  announced  another  sustainable 

development programme. The new sustainable development agenda is described 

as “economic development, social inclusion, and environmental sustainability are 

the three tenets underpinning the forthcoming post-2015 development agenda, a 

once  in  a  generation  opportunity  to  put  mankind  on  the  path  to  a  sustainable 

growth model” 7by Sachs (2015). In this part, the role of communication strategy 

will be assessed from the scope of reaching the set 17 sustainable development 

goals. The sustainable development goals are no poverty, zero hunger, good health 

and  well-being,  quality  education,  gender  equality,  clean  water  and  sanitation, 

affordable  and  clean  energy,  decent  work  and  economic  growth,  industry, 

innovation,  and  infrastructure,  reduced  inequalities,  sustainable  cities  and 

communities, responsible consumption and production, climate action, life below 

water, life on land, peace, justice and strong institutions, and partnerships for the 

goals.  Even  while  the  2030  Agenda  as  a  whole  doesn't  specifically  address 

communication or how the UN or its Member States should go about spreading 

the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs, it is nevertheless possible to infer messages of 

communication from it. Hence, the role of communication in achieving the SDGs 

is  vital  to  discuss.  Effective  and  proactive  communication  is  essential  to  the 

success  of  sustainable  development  initiatives.  Through  communication,  it  is 

essential that every party demonstrate their commitment to the idea of governance 

    7 Sachs, J. D. (2015). Achieving the sustainable development goals. Journal of International Business Ethics,    
8(2),   53-62. 

 
 
 
based  on  sustainable  development  principles.  In  other  words,  sustainable 

development goals are achieved through active communications.  

25 

Globalisation has made it possible for intercultural communication to occur. 

Cross cultural communication is an integral part of the UN's SDG communication 

strategy.  It  is  important  to  deliver  a  message  in  a  way  which  would  be 

understandable  for  different  cultures,  different  religions  and  contrasting 

languages. If a communicator delivers the message in an inefficient way, it may 

even bring harm to the achievements of the sustainable development goals agenda. 

It  is  impossible  to  overstate  the  significance  of  establishing  and  preserving 

effective  communication  throughout  human  society.  The  community  is  held 

together and maintained by effective communication. As Aririguzoh (2022) points 

out, the United Nations understands the cross-cultural dynamic and their role in 

sustainable  development.  Irrelevant  cultural  communication  can  hinder  the 

success  of  SDG  programmes.  By  acknowledging  that  efforts  should  be  both 

locally  and  culturally  relevant,  the  SDGs  are  more  meaningful  and  easily 

attainable.  

Communication is also important since it can translate complex concepts 

into accessible and explicit messages which will be available for understanding. 

Since  the  audience  of  the  SDG  agenda  is  diverse  and  includes  governments, 

corporations,  smaller  business,  NGOs,  individuals  and  many  others,  messages 

should be reachable to every target audience. Thus, it is important for the United 

Nations to create such a message which will be understood by many. For example, 

the SDG campaign called “Act Now” introduced in December of 2018, works on 

SDG thirteen (action against climate change). It is a social movement which uses 

simple wording and popular social media platforms to engage with the audience. 

The creation of an app where people can log in and track their actions, which help 

actions  against  climate change.  This  is an  example  of  how  the  UN  translates a 

 
 
complex  issue  of  climate  change  into  a  fun  activity  which  engages  people  to 

contribute towards achieving SDG 13.  

26 

Also,  the  UN  emphasises  the  importance  of  multi-sided  dialogue  and 

encourages  stakeholders  to  hear  marginalised  voices.  A  well-thought-out 

collaborative  communications  strategy  is  crucial  for  helping  UN  teams  and 

partners  drive  narratives,  achieve  achievements,  and  mobilise  significant  target 

groups, according to the United Nations Sustainable Development Group (2022). 

Campaigns such as “HeForShe” launched by the UN support SDG five and strives 

towards  removing  gender-based  discrimination.  Using  storytelling  to  humanise 

numbers  and  provide  accessible  narratives 

is  part  of 

the  campaign's 

communication  strategy.  For  example,  celebrities  such  as  Emma  Watson  have 

delivered a speech on the topic when the campaign was launched. Also, hashtags 

“#HeForShe”  were  used  across  social  media  where  people  have  shared  their 

personal stories. Hence, storytelling, viral media content and use of celebrities in 

campaigns can drive tangible progress for SDGs.  

Therefore,  in  order  to  ensure  inclusive,  transparent,  and  long-lasting 

progress  towards  global  development,  effective  communication  is  crucial  for 

accomplishing the 17 SDGs since it increases awareness, mobilises stakeholders, 

encourages accountability, and stimulates cooperation. 

1.4 Channels of communication used by the United Nations used in 

promoting SDGs  

The  United  Nations  uses  a  wide  spectrum  of  tools  and  channels  to 

communicate the messages of the SDG agenda. The UN uses both the traditional 

forms  of  media  and  more  contemporary  ones  for  dissemination  of  sustainable 

values. 

 
 
 
27 

From  traditional  media  the  UN  uses  channels  of  communication  such  as 

radio, television and newspapers. News agencies such as BBC or New York time 

and many others shed light on high profile events of the UN which are connected 

to sustainability. Also, the UN uses globally recognised days such as for example 

World Environment Day to raise awareness about the SDG agenda. For instance, 

on  June  5,  2024,  Secretary-General  António  Guterres  issued  a  statement 

highlighting the theme “land restoration, desertification, and drought resilience”, 

(Guterres, 2024). 

Furthermore,  the  UN  uses  more  and  more  digital  platforms  for  its 

communication strategy. Websites and online portals are an integral tool of the 

United Nations nowadays. The official UN SDG website (sdgs.un.org) provides 

full  information  and  all  the  relevant  data  about  each  of  the  goals,  their 

achievements,  statistics,  reports  and  many  more.  Also,  the  UN  has  specialised 

websites for specific campaigns, for example the site for “ActNow” which was 

mentioned  earlier in the first  chapter.  Moreover,  UN  has multiple  social  media 

accounts such as Twitter, Facebook8, Instagram9, YouTube, and LinkedIn. Each 

of  the  social  media  platforms  engages  with  a  different  audience.  For  example, 

LinkedIn  is  aimed  at  more  professional  updates  and  advocacy  efforts  towards 

SDGs and SDG reports. While Twitter provides daily updates and news on global 

issues. Instagram10 engages younger users and employs viral content or challenges 

to  attract  views  and  promote  the  SDG  agenda  through  visuals  (photographs  or 

videos).  

Moreover,  official  reports  and  documents  which  the  United  Nations 

provides  is  also  a  channel  of  communication  of  the  sustainable  development 

8 Facebook (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 
9Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 
10Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 

 
 
 
 
 
28 

programme.  Policy  briefs  are  published  for  governments  or  corporations  to 

advance their actions or alter their strategy for specific goals. Annual SDG reports 

assess  global  progress  toward  achieving  the  17  goals,  highlighting  successes, 

challenges, and areas for improvement. 

Finally,  high-level  events  and  conferences  hosted  by  the  UN  provide  a 

platform for dialogues and mobilisation of resources. Real life events are also a 

method of putting forward a message. The 2021 Food Systems Summit aimed to 

accelerate  progress  toward  SDG  2  (Zero  Hunger)  by  promoting  sustainable 

agricultural practices and food security policies. 

Thus,  the  United  Nations  has  an  array  of  tools  through  which  it  can 

implement its communication strategy. Traditional media, social media platforms, 

events and official documents or reports are all channels of communication. The 

next two chapters will investigate how the features of the communication strategy 

have been altered throughout the years, particularly media platforms and official 

documents and reports will be looked at in detail.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 

Chapter 2 Content Analysis of UN Reports and Social Media 

2.1 Content analysis of UN Communication strategy: methodology 

In  the  second  chapter  of  the  research  a  method  of  qualitative  and 

quantitative content analysis will be employed to investigate how the features of 

the  United  Nations’  communication  strategy  evolve  in  the  context  of  the 

sustainable development goals agenda from 2014 to 2015. Content analysis will 

be  particularly  relevant  to  test  the  hypothesis  since  content  analysis  aids  to 

systematically analyse text and identify certain patterns. Shifts in language, or on 

the contrary continuation of language patterns will allow to trace the evolution of 

communication  strategy. In  other  words,  content  analysis  will trace  changes  or 

stability. 

-       Explanation for the choice of methodology  

Before starting the explanation of the research procedure, it is important to 

understand the choice of the methodology. Small number of marker words (in this 

case four and six) aligns with the principle of concept validity. In other words, 

each of the words explains one of the angles of the hypothesis. As Krippendooff 

(2018) quotes, “Researchers may code for the presence or the absence of particular 

words, themes, or content features in texts to make valid inferences”11.  This quote 

supports  the  strategy  chosen  in  this  content  analysis,  because  a  limited  set  of 

carefully chosen words will be used to track the evolution of UN communication 

strategy.  

11 Krippendorff, K. (2018). Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology (4th ed.). SAGE Publications 

 
  
  
  
  
 
30 

Moreover, the scholae Neuendorf (2017) supports the idea of using targeted 

words or phrases in the content analysis, especially when examining a change or 

a pattern. She advocates for the method of choosing a small and purposeful set of 

words to track them across time period. Neuendorf (2017) highlights “A limited 

set  of  key  terms,  selected  for  their  relevance  to  the  research  question,  can  be 

sufficient to produce meaningful findings”12 . 

-       Data Collection  

The  analysis  will  draw  upon  two  main  types  of  data,  which  are  official 

United Nations sustainable development reports and the UN social media reports. 

These two formats will be complementary to each other and fulfil different roles.  

The reports are an institutional and formal way of communication. Annual 

UN  SDG  reports  are  sourced  from  an  official  United  Nations  website 

(https://sdg.un.org.) and are published once a year to track the completion of the 

seventeen global goals. The analysis of these reports will give an opportunity to 

assess the formal progress. One report per year was sampled, starting from 2016, 

since in 2015 SDGs were only announced. Overall, 9 reports were sampled for 

content analysis.  

On the other hand, social media posts were randomly sampled. 3 main social 

media platforms which are Instagram,13 Facebook14 and X (prior Twitter). These 

platforms were selected since they are the three most popular ones by followers, 

apart  from  Tik  Tok.  Tik  Tok  was  removed  from  the  selection,  since  it  mainly 

concentrates on visual content, while for the given research written content is more 

   12  Neuendorf, K. A. (2017). The Content Analysis Guidebook (2nd ed.). SAGE Publications. 
   13 Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 
   14 Facebook (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 

 
  
  
  
 
relevant. Also, TikTok appeared only after 2016, which does not match the time 

frame. Solely official UN accounts were used to find social media posts.  

31 

One representative post is chosen per platform. For instance, one Instagram 

15post,  one  X  post  and  one  Facebook16  post  per  year.  Therefore,  overall,  thirty 

posts are selected for the given time frame. Posts are sampled randomly within a 

given year, since this increases the data pool. Random sampling is applied to avoid 

any biases by selecting only the most popular posts or the promoted ones. The 

criteria for selection are solely the given year (from 2015 to 2024) and relation to 

SDG. In other words, the post must contain information about the SDG agenda, 

sustainable  development  or  contain  hashtags  such  as  “#ActNow”  and 

“#GlobalGoals”.  

-       Time frame and periodization  

To identify the evolution and a general pattern the pre-given 10-year period 

which is from 2015 to 2024 was divided in three separate and distinct phases. The 

separation was created in such a way that it follows the chronological order of 

global events and the hypothesis. Period one is from 2015 to 2017. The three years 

correlate with the introduction of sustainable goals agenda and raising awareness 

of the global goals. Period two is from 2018 to 2021. This era marks the Covid-

19 pandemic and will test the period of crisis and raise attention on support. Period 

three  is  from  2022  to  2024.  This  three-year  gap  will  test  the  localization 

hypothesis,  which  may  have  occurred  after  the  coronavirus  pandemic.  This 

division will be able to group years in a way which will enable us to assess how 

the UN's communication strategy changed overtime. The whole period from 2015 

to 2024 will be tested for increasing digitization.   

    15 Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 
    16 Facebook (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 

 
  
  
 
 
32 

-       Marker and word selection  

To conduct the analysis marker words were selected based on the topic and 

the relevance of the hypothesis. Since the hypothesis is two-folded two aspects 

have to be tested. The first one is the presence of the digitalization process and the 

second one is the features of the communication strategy: from global awareness 

and  knowledge  building  (2015  –  2017),  to  engagement  and  support  during  the 

pandemic crisis (2018 – 2021) and finally a more localized approach (2022-2024).  

Separate sets of words were used for report content analysis and for social 

media  content  analysis.  The  selection  was  guided  both  by  deductive  method, 

meaning based on theoretical knowledge, and by inductive method, meaning that 

text  was  scanned  preliminary  to  the  analysis.  For  social  media  six  words  were 

selected, while for the reports four. The difference in the number of marker words 

can be explained by the length of reports. Amount of data and text in the UN SDG 

reports  is  larger  than  in  social  media  posts.  Each  marker  word  is  intended  to 

represent  a  feature  embedded  in  the  communication  strategy  of  the  United 

Nations.  

Marker  words  selected  for  the  report  analysis  are:  digital,  local,  global, 

support.  

Marker words selected for social media posts analysis are: partner, action, 

local, engage crisis, future. Below are the codebooks:  

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
33 

Table 1 

 (Table 1 showing the codebook for report content analysis)  

Marker Word 

Digital  

Local  

Global  

Meaning 

Allows  to  trace  the  use  of  digital 

tools  and  communication  methods. 

The  marker  word  will  give  an 

understanding of online presence.  

Examines regional and community-

specific  communication.  Aligns 

with the participatory approach.  

Measures  continued  emphasis  on 

universal messaging and worldwide 

engagement.  

Support  

Assesses  references  to  assistance 

and aid. 

 (Table 2 showing the codebook for social media content analysis)  

Table 2 

Marker Word 

Partner  

Action 

Local  

Meaning 

Tracks mutual engagements as well 

collaborations,  whether  interstate 

collaborations or any other forms.  

Oversees 

mobilization 

and 

campaign activity, as well as serves 

as a “call for action” reference. 

Examines regional and community-

specific  communication.  Aligns 

with the participatory approach. 

 
Engage  

Crisis  

Future  

34 

Marker  word  for  understanding 

interaction  with  the  audience  and 

active participation in SDG agenda. 

Reflects impacts of emergencies or 

any 

other 

global 

or 

local 

extraordinary  situations  with  a 

negative impact. 

Identifies  forward-looking  framing 

and 

motivation 

towards 

sustainability. 

-  Coding procedure  

In the coding procedure there were two steps. Firstly, all the marker words 

were manually identified throughout the texts and counted year by year. In social 

media  posts,  words  were  highlighted  and  then  counted  by  hand.  In  UN  SDG 

reports the marker words were scanned for their appearance. After the mentioned 

procedure,  words  were  aggregated  across  three  periods.  This  would  represent 

main trends in the communication strategy.  

The  results  were  later  visualized  using  Excel.  Word  frequencies  were 

translated  into  line  graphs  for  better  visualization  of  the  results.  This  also 

simplified the evaluation stage.  

-       Validation and limitation of the content analysis research  

To ensure internal validity, completely different types of data were sources. 

Reports  and  social  media  posts  most  likely  have  different  target  audiences. 

However, if marker words will correlate in both cases this will set a clear pattern 

       
 
  
  
 
  
for UN’s communication strategy and prove that it is quite consistent. Another 

strength is that all data was publicly available in open resources online.  

35 

The  limitations  of  the  content  analysis  may  be  that  sample  sizes  are 

relatively  small.  Big  data  analysis  is  not  employed  in  the  following  research. 

Reliance only on keywords may not capture the context or the tone of voice, while 

the random sampling may omit viral content. However, the tone of voice as well 

viral content or challenges initiated by the United Nations will be assed in the third 

chapters through case studies.  

2.2 Content analysis of UN Communication strategy: results 

The results of the described above content analysis will be presented below. 

The data from the results will be shown both individually and grouped by time 

periods.   

- 

Social media posts content analysis results  

 (Table 3 showing the total number of count words by each category in 
social media posts)  

Marker word  

Count  

Table 3 

Partner  

Action  

Local  

Engage 

Crisis 

Future  

5 

24 

1 

2 

3 

11 

  
 
 
36 

 (Table 4 showing the distribution of marker words by categories by year in 

social media posts)   

Year 

Partner 

Action 

Local 

Engage 

Crisis 

Future 

Table 4 

2015 

2016 

2017 

2018 

2019 

2020 

2021 

2022 

2023 

2024 

3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

3 

1 

0 

1 

3 

1 

2 

10 

1 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

2 

0 

3 

2 

1 

Table 5 
 (Table 5 showing the distribution of marker words by categories across 
time periods in social media posts) 

Period   Partner   Action   Local   Engage   Crisis  

Future  

2015 - 
2017 

2018 - 
2021 

2022 - 
2024 

4 

0 

1 

4 

7 

13 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

3 

0 

2 

3 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 

-  United Nations sustainable development goals report content analysis 

result 

 (Table 6 showing the total number of count words by each category 

in UN SDG reports)  

Table 6 

Marker Word 

Digital 

Local 

Global 

Support 

Count 

72 

123 

1718 

304 

 (Table 7 showing the distribution of marker words by categories by 

year in UN SDG reports)  

Digital 

Local 

Global 

Support 

Table 7 

2 

1 

0 

2 

3 

4 

3 

47 

10 

3 

8 

4 

13 

21 

12 

16 

36 

10 

117 

156 

115 

153 

221 

193 

211 

294 

258 

12 

25 

27 

25 

33 

54 

33 

68 

27 

Year 

2016 

2017 

2018 

2019 

2020 

2021 

2022 

2023 

2024 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 

Table 8 
 (Table 8 showing the distribution of marker words by categories across 
time periods in UN SDG reports)  
Global 

Support 

Digital 

Local 

Period 

2016–
2017 

2018–
2021 

2022–
2024 

3 

9 

60 

11 

50 

62 

273 

682 

763 

37 

139 

128 

-  Data visualisation  

             Please see images of data visualization in appendix (graph 1 and graph 2) 

-  Data description  

Looking at content analysis of social media posts a total of six marker words 

were used (partner, action, local, engage, crisis, future). Words partner had five 

counts across the thirty selected posts across three social media, word action had 

twenty-four counts, word local was found one time, word engagement was spotted 

two times, word crisis was found three times and word future only once. Word 

action was the most popular and frequent word across all time periods. From 2022 

to 2024 it was the most frequently used word in social media posts. Crisis had its 

peak number from 2018 to 2021 and was not seen in any other time periods. Word 

local appears only once from 2022 to 2024. Engage also appears once in each of 

the last two time periods. The word future has a good word count, and is the second 

most  popular  word  after  action.  Ranging  from  two  to  six  in  each  of  the  time 

frames. Word partner mainly appeared during the 2015-2017 period, a total of five 

times.  

 
 
 
 
 
39 

Regarding the content analysis of UN SDG reports, four marker words were 

tracked across the nine SDG reports from 2016 to 2024: digital, local, global, and 

support. The word digital was not used very often in the first two periods, three 

and nine times exactly. However, the word count drastically increased in the last 

time period, to being mentioned sixty times. The year 2023 was the most popular 

among  the  word  digital.  The  word  local  appeared  with  greater  regularity 

throughout the reports. Its word count increased from a low of 3 in 2016 to a peak 

of 36 in 2023. The count fluctuated across other years, with notable growth during 

the 2018–2021 period and continuing into 2022–2024. Moving to the word global. 

The word global was the most consistent one out of all the rest marker words. It 

was also the most popular one, appearing 1718 times. Its word count ranged from 

117 to 294 across all years. It remained consistently above 150 from the year 2017. 

Lastly, the word support was the second most popular after the word global. It 

showed persistent presence across all of the reports during the nine-year time span. 

For example, in 2016 it appeared only 12 times and then started to gradually grow. 

It peaked in 2023 with 68 counts. Particularly it was present from 2018 to 2021 

with 138 total mentions.  

When comparing across both data sources, the global marker word showed 

the  highest  overall  count,  consistently  dominating  the  UN  SDG  reports.  The 

Digital marker word rose sharply in 2023 but remained relatively low outside of 

that year. For social media posts content analysis, action emerged as the dominant 

word, growing significantly in the last time period. In this part no interpretations 

or analysis were provided, the core focus of this part was to show the results and 

describe them. The following part will draw conclusions from the gathered data 

from content analysis.  

 
2.3 Content analysis of UN Communication strategy: evaluation of 

40 

results  

The content analysis presented above done both with social media posts and 

official documents published by the United Nations show insights into how the 

UN’s communication strategy altered over time. By content analysis it is possible 

to  identify  main  features  of  the  communication  strategy.  Aligning  with  the 

hypothesis  there  have  been  both  alterations  in  the  form  as  well  as  content  of 

strategic messaging. This evaluation of results draws upon quantitative patterns 

which  were  described  earlier  on  and  compares  them  to  the  hypothesis.  Firstly, 

digitalisation  will  be  analysed,  and  secondly  the  shift  of  features  across  time 

periods from 2015 to 2024 will be taken into consideration.  

To  start  with,  the  hypothesis  of  digitalisation  as  a  medium  of 

communication will be looked at through the scope of content analysis. The first 

level of hypothesis proposed that digital instruments and online tools will be more 

evident and important with time. Digital platforms would enhance UN’s global 

reach  and  accessibility  to  the  target  audience.  Frequency  of  the  marker  word 

digital  in  UN  reports  supports  the  claim  of  the  hypothesis.  While  the  term 

appeared to be uncommon from 2015 to 2021, in 2023 the  word counts spiked. 

And the period from 2022 to 2024 turned out to be the time frame with the most 

common  usage  of  the  word  digital.  This  jump  initiates  the  long  institutional 

changes and the digital transformation which might have appeared after the global 

pandemic. Digitalisation was not immediately apparent however after three years 

after the start of Covid-19 pandemic, it became evident that digitalisation is on the 

rise. The rise of the use of the terminology digital suggests that there was a formal 

recognition  of  digital  tools.  Therefore,  according  to  the  United  Nations  SDG 

reports, digitalisation became more relevant. Despite the fact that in social media 

posts content analysis, the marker word digital was not used, the rising use of the 

word action, which was steadily increasing across all three time periods, reveals 

 
 
41 

an  increased  online  interaction  and  more  efforts  onto  mobilisation  online  and 

through  the  use  of  digital  platforms.  This  also  reinforces  the  idea  that  the  UN 

started to use more and more digital tools to reach their message to the audience 

through social media, which are undoubtedly online and digital platforms.  

Secondly, the hypothesis of shifting features will be tested in accordance 

with  the  data  collected  from  the  content  analysis.  The  second  level  of  the 

hypothesis stated that the UN’s communication strategy would evolve across three 

phases.  From  global  awareness  and  knowledge  building  (2015–2017),  to 

increased  engagement  and  support  during  a  crisis  (2018–2021),  and  then  to  a 

localized,  community  focused  model,  while  still  maintaining  a  digital  scope 

(2022–2024).  

During  the  primary  phase  (2015-2017)  the  word  global  appeared  very 

frequently  in  the  UN  sustainable  development  annual  reports,  a  total  of  273 

mentions.  This  suggests  that  the  United  Nations  institutions  were  trying  to 

emphasise the global scope of the 2030 agenda through official documents. Other 

marker words do show to be prominent. An evaluation can be made that the first 

three  year  since  the  introduction  of  the  global  goals,  the  United  Nations  were 

putting  an  accent  on  the  universality  of  the SDG  agenda,  and  trying  to  bring  a 

message to the audience that the globality of the agenda and its universality is the 

main aspect of the SDG programme. In the social media posts, words like partner 

and  action  were  more  prevalent  during  this  period,  suggesting  a  vision-setting 

stage where the UN prioritized coalition-building and mobilisation of efforts.  

The  second  phase  (2018-2021)  is  the  middle  period  whereby  the  UN’s 

abilities to support countries through the SDG agenda as well as the appearance 

of the crisis itself was tested. The word crisis emerged in social media posts, solely 

in the second time frame, signalling that the United Nations is using responsive 

and adaptive messaging to external factors. Moreover, the marker word support 

 
 
 
42 

and engage rose in count, particularly the word support rose in counts in the UN 

SDG  reports,  peaking  in  2021  at  54  counts.  This  data  suggests  that  during  the 

times  of  crisis  and  emergency  the  United  Nations  emphasised  solidarity, 

resilience, and  shared responsibility.  The recurring motif  which  can  be  noticed 

from 2018 to 2021 is the word action. In social media posts it increased, which 

suggests  that  the  UN’s  communicative  language  encouraged  everyone  to 

participate in common efforts and take immediate actions.  

Finally, the third stage from 2022 to 2024,  hypothesised that more focus 

would be given to local issues and community-based attention. In the UN reports 

the word count local reached the highest frequencies of 36 in 2023 and remained 

notable  both  in  2022  and  2024.  In  social  media  posts,  the  marker  local  also 

appeared for the first time in the third time frame. While the word global remained 

the  most  dominant  term  overall,  the rise  of marker  word local indicates  a  dual 

focus—maintaining  the  global  agenda  while  recognizing  the  value  of  tailored, 

localized approaches. In social media posts the marker words future and action 

were the most popular ones, emphasising mobilisation. What is interesting is that 

the frequency of the word partner declined sharply and appeared only once in the 

final time frame. However, localisation was not exclusive for this sole time frame 

and  appeared  in  other  periods  as for  example  in  2019 it  appeared a  total  of  13 

times.  This  suggests  that  in  this  part  the  hypothesis  has  to  be  disapproved. 

Localisation was not exclusive to only that time period.  

To  compare  the  content  analysis  of  reports  and  social  media  posts,  it  is 

evident that these two sources of communication carry very different purposes. 

Reports are the depiction of scale formality. Even the high frequency of the word 

global shows that universal messaging remains foundational for the institution. In 

contrast, social media appears more reactive and engaging. Words like crisis and 

action reflect the real-time nature of social platforms and also present a focus on 

audience  activation  and  public  participation.  Moreover,  the  spike  in  the  word 

 
 
digital in 2023 UN reports but not in earlier years or social posts may indicate a 

delayed  formal  acknowledgment  of  shifts  already  well  underway  in  public 

43 

communication.  

Overall, the approach taken for content analysis has proved to be effective 

for the following investigation and clearly revealed the evolving features of the 

UN’s  communication  strategy  from  2015  to  2024.  By  systematically  tracking 

marker words across both official UN reports and social media posts, the analysis 

captured shifts in tone, audience targeting, and messaging priorities.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 Evaluation of Strategic Features through Case Studies 

44 

3.1 Case study research  

The third and final chapter presents three separate in-depth case studies of 

campaigns  carried  out  by  the  United  Nations  in  the  field  of  sustainable 

development  and  with  an  aim  of  promoting  SDGs.  The  case  study  method  is 

employed in the following part of the research to investigate concrete examples of 

the  ways  in  which  the  United  Nations  has  communicated  the  sustainable 

development goals. While previous chapters focused on content analysis of reports 

and social media posts to trace broader and more explicit trends, the third chapter 

will  add  depth  and  context  by  analyzing  specific  campaigns  that exemplify  the 

evolving nature of the UN's communication strategy. 

This  particular  method  was  chosen  for  the  last  chapter  of  the  research 

because it is an effective qualitative tool for researching real - world phenomena. 

As  Tellis  (1994)  suggests  “an  empirical  investigation  of  a  contemporary 

phenomenon  within  its  real-life  context  is  one  situation  in  which  case  study 

methodology is applicable”17. This method will complement the previously used 

method of content analysis. That can be explained by the fact that a case study 

allows to carry out a more nuanced analysis and give more detail, in comparison 

to  content  analysis  which  captures  word  frequencies  and  general  themes.  Case 

studies give a chance to assess how the UN’s communication strategy looks like 

and how the messages evolve over certain time periods. It will expose through 

which  platforms  the  UN  delivers  its  message  and  in  what  ways,  whether  it  be 

educational content and entertainment style campaigns.  

      17 Tellis, W. (1997). Application of a case study methodology. The qualitative report, 3(3), 1-19. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-  Choice of campaigns for case studies  

45 

The campaigns that are chosen for the 3 case studies differ in format and 

the theme that they are campaigning in. Hence, the three campaigns which will be 

analysed in the case studies are “Tell Everyone”, “Choose Life” and ‘Halftime”. 

“Tell  Everyone”  campaign  was  launched  in  2015.  This  is  one  of  the  first 

campaigns to be launched by the UN in the spectrum of SDG agenda. The overall 

aim of this specific campaign is to raise awareness about all the 17 goals of the 

SDG agenda. Appeared majorly between 2015 and 2016. The second campaign 

which will be looked at in detail is the “Choose Life” campaign started in 2020. 

The  campaign’s  goal  is  to  take  action  against  climate  change  and  to  change 

lifestyles in accordance with helping the environment. A UK-based climate action 

campaign was developed in collaboration with the UN SDG Action Campaign and 

the UK government. The final campaign which will be taken into consideration 

‘Halftime”  started  in  2023  and  highlights  that  a  half  of  the  SDG  deadline  has 

passed, in other words it shines lights on the momentum of halftime. It emphasises 

the need to recommit to the goals and to continue striving for success.  

During  the  case  studies,  the  research  will  zoom  into  specific  and  most 

prominent moments of the campaigns, which will reveal strategic shifts of the UN 

communication strategy. As Yin (2018) recommends it is crucial to concentrate 

on  specific  milestones  when  conducting  a  case  study.  This  approach  also 

correlates with the research question, where concentration on specific periods will 

allow to trace the evolution of the features of the United Nations’ communication 

strategy for sustainable development goals between 2015 and 2024. The goal of 

this case study is  not to  represent  the  campaign  as  a  whole,  but rather its  peak 

moments, to illustrate the main features of the UN communication strategy and its 

changes.  

 
 
 
46 

The  three  campaigns  were  intentionally  chosen  from  three  different  time 

periods  and  with  different  thematic  approaches.  Tell  Everyone  (2015),  Choose 

Life (2020), and Halftime (2023) all contribute to investigating the features of the 

UN communication strategy, but are all different in their scopes. Tell Everyone is 

a global scale campaign launched in the same year as the sustainable development 

goals  were  announced,  Choose  Life  is  a  climate  initiative  on  a  national  scale, 

Halftime is also a global campaign, however it started at the midpoint of the 2030 

Agenda. It will be also useful to compare how different are the campaigns from 

2015 and 2023 that have a global approach. This deliberate diversity in campaign 

selection allows the study to capture a communication strategy shift from 2015 to 

2024. Together, the three selected campaigns span the full research time frame of 

2015 to 2024. 

-  Conducting the case study  

Each campaign will be analysed according to four dimensions, which will 

create a comprehensible lens for research. Which are the background and context 

of  the  campaign,  messaging  techniques  and  framing,  media  and  platforms  and 

strategic features. Firstly, background and context will give general data about the 

campaign and will emerge into the context of the UN’s initiative. This will include 

interpreting  campaign  decisions,  such  as  audience  targeting  or  thematic  focus. 

Secondly,  messaging  techniques  and  framing  which  analyse  slogans,  tones  and 

overall narrative. Next, media and platforms criteria will identify platforms and 

media types, through which digitalisation can be analysed. The final dimension, 

analysis of strategic features, will critically analyse the other criteria and come to 

a conclusion about how the campaign reflects trends such as digital shift, global-

to-local transitions, increased participatory focus or actions in times of crises.  

 
 
 
 
 
47 

3.2 Case study: Tell Everyone Сampaign (2015) 

- 

Background and Context 

The Tell Everyone campaign was introduced in 2015. It was the identical 

year when the United Nations announced the seventeen sustainable development 

goals. Despite the fact that the new and ambitious agenda was set and goals had 

to  be reached  by  2030,  the  SDG  programme  was  far  from  well-known  and the 

majority of people were ignorant about it (Project Everyone, 2025). The campaign 

was  delivered  in  partnership  with the  United  Nations  and  Project  Everyone,  as 

well as the UN Department of Public Information. Project Everyone, which is a 

creative agency working with the UN to promote SDGs in a unique and interesting 

way, commented on the launch of the campaign with the following words “We set 

our sights on a new ambition, of reaching seven billion people in seven days”. 18 

This citation creates a notion that preparation of the campaign has taken a week 

which was a strenuous process and a challenging one. It was a global and universal 

campaign incorporating multiple stakeholders such as the country's governments 

including  ministries,  creative  communities  and  organisations,  radio  stations, 

volunteers and even mobile operators. Richard Curtis was the creative director of 

the campaign.  It was a campaign about teaching the world of the SDGs and getting 

acquainted with the concept of sustainable development. The target audience of 

the campaign was the whole world population, which did not know about the 2030 

agenda. The following UN SDG campaign wanted to reach everyone of all ages 

and nationalities, as well as governments and businesses. The goals of the Tell 

Everyone  campaign  lies  in  its  title  to  inform  about  the  new  SDG  agenda.  The 

campaign is the result of an institutional milestone: a transfer from MDG to SDG 

   18  Project Everyone. (2025). 10 Years of Impact: Project Everyone Impact Report. https://project-
everyone.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/HS471-PE-Impact-Report_Digital-FINAL.pdf 

 
 
 
48 

agenda.  It  was  designed  as  a  multimedia,  multi-platform  global  activity.  The 

campaign  Tell  Everyone  involved  an  extensive  network  of  media  outlets, 

celebrities, influencers, digital companies, NGOs, and educational partners. 

-  Messaging techniques and framing  

The Tell everyone campaign used various messaging techniques. One of the 

most vivid ones is storytelling which can be seen in a  YouTube video “We the 

people” (part of the content of the campaign) where celebrities deliver a message 

in  a  storytelling  format.  Actors,  musicians,  scientists  share  the  importance  of 

SDGs,  making  the  2030  agenda  feel  more  accessible  due  to  the  appearance  of 

public figures.  Given the complexity and scale of the 2030 Agenda—comprising 

17 goals and 169 targets—the campaign’s key communication challenge was to 

simplify  and  to  make  the  campaign  more  humanised.  The  slogan  and 

simultaneously  the  name  of  the  campaign  “Tell  Everyone”  signifies  a  call  for 

action.  If  an  individual  found  out  or  has  information  about  the  sustainable 

development goals, he/she should share the knowledge with others. Responsibility 

lies within individuals, not solely governments or the UN, is a clear message of 

the  campaign.  However,  still  the  campaign  was  messaged  through  a  top-down 

approach.  

Overall,  the  strategic  framing  of  the  campaign  has  very  positive  and 

appealing  tones,  there  is  negativity,  crisis  or  emergency  language.  The  SDG 

agenda is presented in a very hopeful and optimistic way, motivating the people 

to strive for the future goals (Saxena, 2017). It is also noticeable that the campaign 

is  tailored  towards  different  cultures  and  countries.  Despite  universal  actions, 

many countries such as India or Brazil have voiced the Tell Everyone campaign 

in  their  own  manner.  Materials  were  translated  and  localised  to  accommodate 

cultural and linguistic diversity. In other words, the campaign framed the SDGs 

not as a Western agenda, but as a truly global blueprint.  

 
 
 
-  Media and platforms  

49 

The platforms used by the UN to promote the campaign were both online 

and offline. Starting with real-life platforms. State ministries were involved in the 

promotion of the campaign, particularly the Ministries of Education. An equal of 

one  hundred  and  three  Ministries  of  Education  supported  the  Tell  Everyone 

campaign and committed towards teaching and giving basic information about the 

SDG agenda to their students, which reflects a top-down approach.  Moreover, 

about  one  hundred  and  thirty-six  countries  raised  their  national  flags  to  show 

global unity and support for the SDGs. A similar activity was supported by the 

United  Nations  which  have  illustrated  the  symbols  and  visual  pictures  of  the 

Global Goals onto their buildings. An offline event which supported the campaign 

in 2015 was called the Global Citizen festival. It was broadcasted nearly in all the 

countries worldwide and was attended by high-ranking individuals and celebrities. 

The headliners of the festival were famous people such as Beyonce. Richard Curtis 

has diffused the Tell Everyone content across the festival, delivering the universal 

messages to the attendants and viewers.  

Touching  the  theme  of  digital  platforms.  According  to  Project  Everyone 

(2025)  statistics  mobile  operators  reached  over  925  million  customers  with 

messages abounding the SDG agenda. Moreover, according to Project Everyone 

(2025) statistics, radio programmes in seventy-five countries have presented audio 

streaming  content  to  announce  the  2030  agenda.  A  YouTube  video  “We  the 

People” which got over four million views (as of April, 2025) has represented a 

number of people and their stories of passion for specific SDG goals, in a way 

delivering  information  about  each  and  every  seventeen  goals.  Figures  such  as 

Stephen  Hawking,  Jennifer  Lawrence,  Jennifer  Lopez,  Matt  Damon,  Meryl 

Streep, Malala Yousafzai, Aamir Khan and Meryl Streep and many other famous 

people have participated in the video. Specific countries such as Brazil and India 

have also impacted the campaign. For example, in Brazil three comedy films were 

released which got over twenty-three million views on YouTube as claimed by 

50 

Project  Everyone  (2025).  While  in  India  the  production  of  series  by  Yash  Raj 

Films which shone light on the SDG programme, was trending number one on 

YouTube a day after the video was posted as shown by Project Everyone (2025). 

These are also examples of national actions on sustainability made to transfer the 

message into a global one through tools of social media.  

- 

Analysis of Strategic Features 

The  Tell  Everyone  campaign  exemplifies  the  early  stage  of  the  United 

Nations’  evolving  communication  strategy  for  the  Sustainable  Development 

Goals agenda. It is a simple multi-stakeholder campaign the goal of which is to 

make the world acquainted with the 2030 agenda. It is characterised by global-

awareness building and using hybrid platforms to translate a message (online and 

offline). The target audience of the campaign were all seven billion people which 

had to be reached. Tell Everyone put scale and simplicity, as well as primitive 

messaging into a priority. This ensured that the goals were presented in a way that 

was accessible to all audiences regardless of age, education level, or geographic 

location  and  so  on.  It  was  a  campaign  with  positive  messaging,  mainly 

communicated  through  YouTube  video  as  well  as  offline  activities  and 

government  structures.  From  a  technological  standpoint,  while  not  yet  fully 

“digital-first”  in  the  modern  sense.  Tell  Everyone  lacked  strong  participatory 

elements  such  as  user-generated  content  and  employed  mainly  a  top-down 

approach.  The  main  social  media  content  was  the  video,  while  other  messages 

were delivered on offline format or through radio. It laid the groundwork for future 

SDG campaigns and set the principle that global goals require a global approach. 

3.3 Case study: Choose Life Campaign (2020) 

- 

Background and Context 

The  Choose  Life  campaign  was  launched  in  October  of  2020  in 

collaboration with Project Everyone, as well as the The Climate Coalition. Project 

51 

Everyone is a non-profit organisation with an approach of creative agency which 

communicates  SDG  goals  in  an  artistic  way,  including  various  ways  such  as 

unique  events,  films,  short  videos  and  organised  campaigns.  TCC  is  a  UK 

organisation  which  works  towards  climate  change.  The  foundation  of  the 

campaign  was  an  educational  and  awareness  film,  called  Choose  Life,  which 

correlates with the name of the actual SDG campaign. The slogan “Choosing Life” 

directly means that governments and people should come together and protect the 

environment from damaging events which climate change can bring about. As The 

Global Goals Organisation (2020) points out the film was “designed to send a very 

clear message to the UK government: Now is the time to do the right thing, and 

take advantage of these unprecedented times to avoid reverting back to our old 

ways”.  19The film was directed by Adam Smith and the script for the film was 

written by Mike Benson. The main goal of the film and the SDG campaign was to 

bring awareness and shine light on the dilemma of climate change. It is important 

to  note  that the  campaign  was  launched  in 2020  in  the  period  of  the  Covid-19 

pandemic. Global Goals Organisation (2020) notices that the pandemic showed 

the fragility of the world in emergencies, where all the systems both economic and 

political ones come under pressure. The film illustrates new opportunities which 

can be taken by the UK to recover from such a shock. Choose Life captures mainly 

two sustainable development goals which are Goal 3 and Goal 13. Development 

goal 3 is about health and well-being, while development goal 13 is about climate 

action. It is a symbiosis of health and climate change which are interconnected 

and vital for sustainable development. Initially, it was a national campaign which 

escalated towards a global level being an integral part of the UN communication 

strategy in 2020. It is a limited campaign and not an ongoing initiative.  

-  Messaging techniques and framing  

Firstly, the main slogan and title of the campaign is “Choose Life” which 

means that people and government need to move forward and look into the future. 

19 The Global Goals. (2020). Choose life. https://www.globalgoals.org/news/choose-life/  

 
52 

It coincides with the idea that a recovery after the global pandemic is very much 

needed, as well the preservation of the environment is crucial to protect the lives 

of many. The core message and phrase which is said in the monologues in a film 

is “We are at a crossroads – choose life or choose extinction.”20 The film stresses 

urgency and moral responsibility. The campaign uses strong emotional imagery 

and language to evoke concern, empathy, and even fear, making climate inaction 

feel personal. The simplicity here lies in the fact that primitive language is used 

which translates into a vivid message understandable to the audience. The slogan 

“Choose Life” is repeated in videos and social media to stick in the viewer’s mind. 

One of the campaign’s most defining features was its repurposing of the iconic 

monologue from the 1996 film Trainspotting, transforming it into a compelling 

call for climate responsibility. 

-  Media and platforms  

The  mechanics  of  Choose  Life  campaign  were  hybrid,  employing  both 

online and offline platforms.  

Firstly, as it was already mentioned it was the film itself which was carrying 

a  message.  The  movie  also  was  supported  by  different  online  platforms.  The 

online  platform  had  multiple  functions,  such  as  an  educational  role,  multiple 

resources, information and guides which raised the knowledge of the audience on 

how  to  “choose  life’.  It  was  also  a  tool  for  expressing  political  advice  to  the 

members  of  parliament  (MP)  on  the  issue  of  climate  change.  The  fact  that  the 

collaboration  includes  TCC,  the  organisation  is  striving  towards  a  more 

environmentally  friendly  and  healthy  future.  This  is  done  through  signing  of 

declaration. The declaration was signed by a number of prominent companies such 

as  Tesco,  Sky,  BAFTA,  Selfridges  and  also  popular  individuals  such  as  Liam 

Gallagher,  Ellie  Goulding,  Annie  Lennox,  Sunetra  Sarker,  Luke  Evans  (The 

Global  Goals  Organisation,  2020).  The  signatures  aim  towards  post-pandemic 

    20 Project Everyone. (2021). Choose life. The Global Goals. https://www.globalgoals.org/news/choose-life/  

 
 
53 

recovery.  Touching  the  subject  of  social  media,  the  film  was  promoted  on 

Instagram21  on 

the  official  account  of 

the  Global  Goals  Organisation 

(@theglobalgoals). Online, the campaign was supported by famous people such 

as Lewis Cel Spellman, Hamilton and Coldplay.  Annie Lennox and Luke Evans 

appear in campaign content, reading scripts. Also, the song “Tell Everybody” was 

composed and sung by famous artists and musicians from Africa.  

Moving  to  the  offline  platforms,  the  movie  was  showcased  at  26th 

Conference  of  the  Parties  to  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on 

Climate Change or COP26. Particularly, it was shown in the blue zone. Blue Zone 

is an official space where main negotiations and discussion take place.  

Moving to the results, according to Project Everyone (2025) impact report 

the Choose Life campaign had over four hundred thousand views and became the 

most viewed campaign of The Climate Coalition in terms of organic content on 

their Instagram 22feed.  

- 

Analysis of Strategic Features 

The Choose Life campaign launched in 2020 uses a spectrum of strategic 

features  to  convey  the  message  to  the  audience.  It  is  also  a  great  example, 

illustrating one of many UN campaigns which shape the communication strategy 

of  the  United  Nations.  It  is  a  blend  of  appeal  to  emotion  type  of  messaging, 

nationally targeted campaign (to the UK citizens) and hybrid format, employing 

both  digital  and  real-life  platforms  to  promote  Choose  Life  campaign.  It  is 

strategically framed under SDG 13 and SDG 3. The campaign morally persuades 

to  change  the  behaviour  and  alter  lifestyle  choices  for  a  better  future.  The 

campaign  also  exemplifies  how  a  localized  (national  scale)  communication 

approach can be employed within a global framework. The campaign was most 

likely  directed  at  the  target  audience  of  millennials,  since  the  Choose  Life 

    21 Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 
    22 Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 

 
54 

campaign  references  the  movie  “Trainspotting”  released  in the  year  1996.  It  is 

evident that the decision of the UN in collaboration with other organisations to 

anchor a global message within a national media and linguistic context reflects a 

shift in UN strategy towards localization approach of global goals, especially as 

the  SDGs  moved  from  the  introductory  phase  into  implementation.  From  a 

technological standpoint the campaign used social media and online platforms to 

deliver  the  messages,  which  correlates  with  modern  technological  trends.  It  is 

crucial to notice that the campaign stands on the message of altering individual 

behaviour, rather than promoting institutional reform. The campaign shows that 

initially it is important to start making changes by yourself.  The campaign also 

lacked a participatory approach. 

To sum up, the Choose Life campaign reflects a quite mature stage of UN 

communication strategy. It is localised but with a global outreach, it has cultural 

adaptation and uses digital platforms to deliver the message.  

3.4 Case study: Halftime Campaign (2023)  

- 

Background and Context 

The  Halftime  campaign  was  launched  in  2023,  eight  years  after  the 

announcement  of  the  2030  agenda.  It  is  evident  that  half  of  the  time  for 

achievement of the SDG has gone by. As Global Goals Organisation (2023) points 

out  “in  2015,  193  world  leaders  agreed  on  the  #GlobalGoals,  a  game  plan  to 

change the world by 2030. Today, at halftime, we’re losing – with only 15% of 

our Goals on track”23. This campaign is a signal of alarm that more effort has to 

be put into achieving the sustainable development goals. The progress of the SDG 

goals  was  hindered  by  the  global  pandemic,  conflicts  and  climate  crisis.  The 

campaign’s  main  goal  is  to  recommit  for  another  “halftime”.  The  Halftime 

  23 Global Goals. (2023). Halftime: A wake-up call for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Retrieved April 
26, 2025, from https://www.globalgoals.org/halftime/ 

 
 
55 

Campaign coincided with key events such as the SDG Summit 2023, where world 

leaders  gathered  to  assess  progress  and  recalibrate  strategies.  One  of  the  main 

partners  of  the  following  campaign  was  the  UN  Office  for  Partnerships,  other 

partners  also  included  Bloomberg  TV,  Warner  Bros  and  others.  The  campaign 

strives  to  mobilise  all  the  societal  sectors.  In  other  words,  it  is  a  universal 

campaign, with the world population being the target audience of the given UN 

campaign. The foundation of the Halftime campaign was a film which depicted 

an  altered  Al  Pacino’s  monologue  from  the  “Inch  by  Inch”.  The  speech  was  a 

remake to fit into the theme of global goals. Parallel to the film, a webpage on the 

global goal’s official website was created.  

-  Messaging techniques and framing  

The halftime campaign mainly employed sports themed messaging as a way 

to motivate the audience and achieve the results. The word “halftime” has great 

associations  with  sports,  where  an  interval or  a  break  is  given  during  a  match. 

Terms in the film within a monologue such as “we’re down at halftime”, “it’s time 

for a comeback”, and “every move counts” were used to convey a sense of urgency 

without evoking despair or a feeling of guilt. The key messaging technique which 

was used was a metaphorical effect. Comparing the achievement of the SDGs to 

a match reinforced the idea of teamwork and hard, strenuous work which is present 

in professional sports. Positive urgency is also noticeable in the campaign. The 

campaign was framed in a positive light that there is still home for achieving the 

2030 agenda. On the official webpage of the campaign phrases such as “join the 

team” can be noticed. The Halftime campaign encourages action with a pleasant 

undertone. 

-  Media and platforms  

The Halftime Campaign used a hybrid platform incorporation of both digital 

platforms and offline tools. Starting with real-life events, during the UN General 

Assembly  the  film  “Halftime”  premiered.  The  film  was  played  at  a  variety  of 

56 

events  such  as  the  Global  Citizen  Festival  in  Central  Park,  the  Reuters  Impact 

Summit, the SDG Pavilion at the United Nations Headquarters. These are very 

prestigious  and  high-ranking  places,  which  made  the  film  quite  recognisable. 

Furthermore,  the  2023  SDG  Summit  in  New  York  physical  installations  and 

events  branded  with  Halftime  messaging 

reinforced  visibility  among 

policymakers and media outlets. The Halftime campaign actively engaged schools 

and  educators  through  structured  lesson  plans  and  interactive  activities.  A  key 

resource was the “Halftime Talk for the Global Goals” lesson plan, designed to 

help  students  reflect  on  the  progress  of  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals 

(SDGs).  Educators  were  encouraged  to  do  activities  with  the  students  by 

imagining what the world would look like if the global goals would be achieved 

to  the  fullest  by  2030.  Therefore,  on  a  national  scale  schools  supported  the 

Halftime  campaign.  Moreover, 

local  organizations  hosted  SDG-themed 

workshops, discussion forums and awareness days in community centres or public 

spaces  with  an  aim  of  promoting  the  sustainable  development  programme  as 

pointed  out  by  World's  Largest  Lesson  organisation  (2023).  The  campaign 

provided  open-access  downloadable  toolkits  for  communities,  schools,  and 

individuals  to  create  their  own  Halftime  actions.  Rather  than  employing  a  top-

down approach, each individual could decide what “Halftime” means for them. 

Actions were framed not as centrally run events, but as community-led initiatives 

using global branding such as “Halftime Talks”.  

Touching  the  subject  of  digital  platforms,  particularly  television.  The 

United Nations has used donated money to pay for the advertisements on channels 

such as Sky Sports and NBC Sports during halftimes of major sports events. This 

was quite symbolic since it correlated with the sport theme of the campaign and 

the  “halftime”  of  the  global  goals  agenda.  On  social  media,  influencers  were 

sharing  the  message  of  the  halftime  campaign.  Prominent  figures  such  as 

Coldplay, Alesha Dixon, Forest Whitaker, Kate Hudson, David Beckham, Comic 

Relief,  Jennifer  Garner,  Matthew  Modine,  U2,  Alastair  Campbell,  Nikolaj 

57 

Osterwalder.  Hashtags  like  #Halftime,  #ForPeopleForPlanet,  and  #GlobalGoals 

were  promoted  across  platforms.  The  social  media  strategy  also  included  short 

motivational  videos  and  videos  of  the  mentioned  celebrities  what  “halftime” 

specifically means for their country. The campaign’s webpage includes the actual 

video of the film as well as text which call for action. It calls to donate money for 

achieving  the  SDG  goals,  sharing  the  film  and  joining  the  halftime  campaign. 

According to Project Everyone (2025) the campaign had about two thousand units 

of editorial coverage which was broadcasted on national media across the whole 

globe. Media platforms and TV channels broadcasted the message of the Halftime 

campaign.  National  media  from  Europe,  the  United  States  and  the  UK 

participated. Platforms such as BBC, Reuters and many others have taken part in 

broadcasting  the  campaign.  The  campaign  explicitly  invited  user-generated 

content through hashtags like #Halftime, #Act4SDGs to share their interpretation 

of the “halftime”. 

- 

Analysis of Strategic Features 

Analysing  the  strategic  features  of  the  Halftime  campaign  is  a  mature 

campaign  in  the  UN’s  communication  strategy.  It  emphasises  urgency  and 

renewed  collective  action  which  is  highly  needed  for  achieving the  sustainable 

development goals. The campaign borrows language from sport, resonating with 

emotions and an accessible metaphor. The campaign uses a simple and primitive 

narrative  which  is  understandable  to  both  regular  audiences  as  well  as 

policymakers. Another strategically noticeable trait is the accountability and use 

of numbers, percentage in the campaign. Halftime placed significant weight on 

measuring  progress,  highlighting  missed  targets,  and  urging  governments, 

institutions, and individuals to accelerate their efforts. The campaign also used a 

hybrid  model  of  communication,  employing  social media  and localised  events. 

Despite the fact that the campaign was universal, local activities were still present 

such as celebrities discussing the “halftime” progress on a national scale of their 

country.  It  can  be  said  that  during  this  campaign  the  United  Nations  used 

58 

“glocalization”. The United Nations was thinking globally while at the same time 

acting locally.  This  ensured that the  campaign’s  message  was  both  unified  and 

context-sensitive. The campaign was very active online and on digital platforms, 

which is a common trait for the year of 2023. Overall, the Halftime Campaign 

gave a “a breath of fresh air” to the public discourse around the SDGs and also 

redefined the narrative, moving from what needs to be achieved, to what has been 

done  and  what  must  urgently  happen  before  2030  to  achieve  the  SDGs 

programme. Also, there is a noticeable in participatory approach. It encouraged 

local communities, schools, and youth groups to organize their own events and 

actions under a shared global framework. The campaign prioritised a bottom-up 

approach.  

3.5 Comparative analysis 

The following section will provide a comparative analysis of the three case 

studies mentioned above: Tell Everyone (2015), Choose Life (2020), and Halftime 

(2023).  The comparison of these campaigns will allow us to trace how the features 

of the United Nations communication strategy have evolved from 2015 to 2024. 

Each of the three campaigns reflects a distinct approach to messaging, audience 

targeting, media use, and strategic purpose. To begin the comparative analysis, it 

is firstly vital to describe the characteristics of all the three campaigns. The UN 

Tell  Everyone  campaign  was  one  of  the  first  communication  campaigns  and 

focused on mass awareness and building knowledge. The target audience was the 

whole population. The Choose Life campaign developed in a national context. It 

shows  a  more  targeted  and  culturally  adapted  strategy.  Finally,  the  Halftime 

campaign represents both global accountability and localised approach.   

 
 
 
 
 
Below is the table summarising the three campaigns:  

59 

 (Table 9 showing comparison between three campaigns) 

Table 9 

Feature 

Tell Everyone 

Choose Life (2020) 

Halftime (2023) 

(2015) 

Main 

Raise global 

Inspire behavioural 

Reignite 

Objective 

awareness of 

change related to 

commitment and 

SDGs 

climate action and 

motivation at 

health  

SDG midpoint 

Framing 

Optimism, 

Urgency, moral 

Accountability, 

and tone  

universality, 

appeal, personal 

comeback 

shared 

responsibility 

responsibility 

narrative, 

urgency 

Audience 

Global general 

UK-based citizens, 

Global leaders, 

public 

especially 

institutions, 

millennials and Gen 

global general 

X 

public  

Geograph

Global 

National (UK) 

Global, with 

ic Scope 

bottom-up 

implementation 

Media 

Global 

TV ads, YouTube, 

Digital-first 

Channels 

broadcast (TV), 

digital storytelling, 

platforms, live 

online video 

national press 

global events, 

platforms, 

coverage 

social media, 

campaign 

website, 

social media, 

SDG Pavilion, 

school and youth 

events, 

60 

educational 

toolkits / guides  

community 

activations 

Over the course of these three campaigns spanning from 2015 to 2024 there 

can be a noticeable pattern of approach. UN’s communication strategy evolving 

from a more top-down approach to more participatory actions. The Tell Everyone 

campaign set the tone for all the other campaigns by being part of the first UN 

SDG campaign, however a top-down approach can be noticed by integration of 

Ministries  of  Education  into  the  campaign.  Higher  level  institutions  were  an 

important part of the Tell Everyone campaign. The Tell Everyone campaign was 

also quite global, however still localised in specific areas as for example songs 

written by African singers in support of the Tell Everyone Campaign, however the 

accent  was  still  on  universality.  In  contrast,  the  Choose  Life  campaign  has 

narrowed down its scope and selected a more national scale campaign. Though 

less globally visible, it reflected growing awareness within the UN of the need to 

adapt  messages  to  local  contexts  and  media  consumption  patterns.  When 

analysing the Halftime campaign, it can be said that it was a mixture of both earlier 

campaigns. It blends elements of both earlier campaigns: the broad outreach and 

symbolic framing of Tell Everyone, with the digital integration and behavioural 

targeting of Choose Life. 

Talking about localisation, the Halftime launched in 2023 shows the high 

local patterns. Tell Everyone was also localised but through top-down approaches 

such as through Ministries of Education, Choose Life was too narrow and solely 

limited  in  the  scope  of  the  United  Kingdom.  Halftime  enabled  a  bottom-up 

participation  model  that  invited  schools,  youth  groups,  and  community 

organizations to lead their own SDG-related actions and improve progress towards 

achieving  the  2030  agenda.  All  campaigns  demonstrated  localisation  of  the 

agenda.   

 
 
61 

Discussing the digitalisation pattern of the three campaigns, it is noticeable 

that  all  of  them  employed  some  sort  of  digital  and  online  patterns.  The  Tell 

Everyone  campaign  employed  social  media  platforms  such  as  YouTube  to 

increase their visibility in an online environment. There was no branded app under 

the name of the Tell Everyone campaign. However, GlobalGoals.org served as the 

main content hub, hosting videos, graphics, and goal explanations. The campaign 

still  heavily  relies  on  traditional  sources  of  media  such  as  radio  or  mobile 

operators. There was limited reach from the audience due to a limitation of the 

number of social media platforms used. Moving to the Choose Life Campaign, it 

also employed social media platforms such as YouTube. The following campaign 

was  hosted  on  UN  Climate  Change  and  UK  government  partner  sites.  The 

Halftime  campaign  employed  a  variety  of  social  media  platforms,  outside  of 

YouTube. The campaign had a specific web page calling to action. Moreover, they 

offered downloadable resources and engagement guides. Still, user participation 

was limited due to a seclusion towards only one social media platform. Lastly, the 

Halftime  campaign  exemplifies  full  digital  integration:  it  leveraged  TikTok, 

Instagram24,  downloadable  toolkits,  and  user-generated  content  campaigns  to 

promote local actions and global momentum. Among the three Halftime employed 

the most digital tools and realised the digital potential to its fullest.  

In addition, all three campaigns had their similarities. They all attempt to 

simplify and humanize the goals, make use of multimedia platforms, and invite 

public  participation  in  different  forms.  All  the  campaigns  also  employed  both 

online and offline platforms, however the extent of their use varies across years 

and campaigns.  

To  finalise,  the  trajectory  between  the  2015  Tell  Everyone  and  Halftime 

campaign shows growing maturity and sophistication in the UN’s communication 

24 Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 

 
 
 
 
62 

strategy.  The  Tell  Everyone  campaign  opened  the  conversation,  Choose  Life 

personalised it, while Halftime challenges institutions and citizens to act with time 

running out. By examining the following three campaigns it becomes clear that 

the message evolves from primitive message distribution to strategic engagement. 

This progression reflects both the changing demands of the global public and the 

UN's own learning process. As the 2030 agenda slowly moves towards an end the 

United  Nations  is  no  longer  about  awareness  but  rather  mobilisation  and 

motivation.  Moreover,  the  digitalization  and  more  active  use  of  social  media 

platforms is more evident with time.   

3.6 Political recommendations  

This section will propose certain political recommendations to the 

international organisation of the United Nations on how to improve its 

communication strategy in the SDG field up to the year 2030.  

            The political recommendations include institutionalizing participatory 

localization across member states, strengthening accountability communication 

through national monitoring mechanisms and investing in youth-led and culturally 

relevant messaging. 

- 

 Institutionalize Participatory Localization Across Member 

States 

When the Halftime campaign was launched it showed how successfully 

bottom-up methods can be employed. The UN should encourage Member States to 

adopt national SDG communication strategies that include frameworks for 

grassroots participation. Ministries of Education, youth centres and cultural 

institutions should be encouraged systematically to support the sustainable 

development programme. SDG messages are advised to be embedded into 

curricula, local media, and civic spaces, going beyond periodic campaigns. This 

recommendation suggests moving away from top-down approaches.  

 
- 

Strengthen accountability communication through national 

63 

monitoring mechanisms 

Another communication strategy which would be probably effective is 

implementation of a mechanism which would track the attainment of sustainable 

development goals into campaigns. Governments and UN bodies should co-create 

public-facing progress trackers that reflect local and national SDG achievements 

and shortfalls. This tool should have a digital footprint as well as easy access and 

simplicity of language. Even though such an idea already exists, and the UN has 

SDG trackers, they are not actively communicated. Future campaigns should aim 

to integrate these tools directly into their messaging, simplify the data presentation, 

and develop locally adapted dashboards  

- 

Invest in youth-led and culturally relevant messaging 

Youth and the younger generation are undoubtedly an important target 

audience of the United Nations. Governments should provide funding and digital 

infrastructure to support youth-led campaigns, school-based SDG challenges, and 

localized media content. Moreover, communication and campaigns of the United 

Nations should also try to adapt language in line with the trend of the youth. While 

the UN has made notable strides in engaging youth through global campaigns and 

toolkits, there is a need for stronger political support and funding at the national 

level. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
64 

Conclusion  

To  conclude,  this  research  sets  out  to  examine  the  features  of  the  United 

Nations’ communication strategy for sustainable development goals between 2015 

and  2024.  The  topic  is  highly  relevant  as  effective  communication  strategies  are 

essential for advancing the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 

in an increasingly digital and fragmented global landscape. The fact that the United 

Nations does not state its communication strategy explicitly the following research 

uncovers  its  communication  approach.  When  selecting  the  core  IR  theory  of  the 

study it was decided that liberalism would serve as the foundation. This is because 

the  liberal  theory  focuses  on  multiple  stakeholders,  the  free  flow  of  information, 

transparency, and cooperation among institutions. 

The research question posed is "How have the features of the United Nations' 

communication  strategy  evolved  in  the  context  of  the  Sustainable  Development 

Goals agenda from 2015 to 2024?". Therefore, to examine the following research 

question the study was  structured into three interconnected chapters. Chapter one 

has provided historical background and role of communications in SDG field for the 

United Nations, chapter two has conducted a  content analysis of UN reports and 

social media outputs and finally chapter three has delivered case studies of the three 

UN campaign, followed by a comparative analysis of the campaigns and afterwards 

political  recommendations  were  proposed to  the  United  Nations  on  how  to make 

their  communication  strategy  more  effective  in  the  upcoming  years  of  the  SDG 

agenda  up  to  2030.  The  overarching  aim  of  the  research  was  to  evaluate  the 

hypothesis that 1) The hypothesis is that the UN's communication strategy will go 

through digitalization as a foundational communication medium to enhance global 

reach  and  accessibility.  2)  The  characteristics  of  communication  strategy  will 

change.    Shifting towards  global  awareness and  residing  knowledge  about  newly 

 
 
 
65 

introduced  SDGs  from  2015  to  2017,  2018  to  2021  was  described  by  increasing 

reach, engagement and support in the period of a global pandemic and from 2022 up 

to 2024 UN concentrated on localised issues, while maintaining the digital format 

(hybrid format).  

It  is  significant  to  look  at  each  chapter  and  the  methodology  in  detail  to 

understand how each part contributes to evaluating the central hypothesis. Chapter 

one  laid  the  conceptual  foundation  by  contextualizing  the  evolution  of  UN 

communication practices in light of global development agendas, from the twentieth 

century, moving to Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and  approaching the 

SDGs. Strategic intentions behind the communication efforts were examined as well 

as the different paradigms of development communication were discussed. It was 

highlighted  that  active  communication  is  key  in  attaining  the  2030  agenda. 

Moreover,  channels  of  communication  were  thoroughly  analysed  which  included 

more conservative methods as well more modern tools. The chapter highlighted how 

the launch of the sustainable development goals programme in 2015 coincided with 

rising  digital  connectivity  and  institutional  efforts  to  create  a  universal,  inclusive 

development narrative. This provided an essential background for evaluating shifts 

in strategy over time.  

Moving to the second chapter which provided a content analysis of official 

UN  SDG  progress  reports  and  social  media  posts  on  Instagram25,  Twitter,  and 

Facebook26. The method of content analysis was chosen since it would vividly reflect 

the shifts in language patterns overtime and help to identify the evolution of UN’s 

features of communication strategy. One social media post was chosen from each of 

the three social media platforms on an annual basis through random sampling; as a 

result, thirty social media posts were analysed from 2015 to 2024. Furthermore, one 

annual  SDG  report  was  taken  from  2016  to  2024,  making  up  nine  official  UN 

25 Instagram (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 
26Facebook (owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) 

 
 
 
66 

documents in total. Such a composition of data would provide a both formal outlook 

on SDG communication as well as a more colloquial approach through social media. 

Using targeted marker words such as "digital," "local," "global," and "support" in 

reports, and "partner," "action," "engage," "crisis," and "future" in social media, the 

research  identified  linguistic and  thematic changes  across three  periods.  The  data 

from the posts was later sorted into three time periods, similar to the hypothesis to 

test it. As a result, it was investigated that from 2015 to 2017, the focus was primarily 

on introducing the SDGs and promoting global awareness and universality. Between 

2018 and 2021, content emphasized emotional urgency and support, largely shaped 

by  the  climate  crisis  and  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  From  2022  onward,  the 

communication  showed  more  explicit  use  of  participatory  language  with  the 

frequent use of the marker word “support”, disapproved the feature of intensified 

localisation, since it was present across  all time periods. The digitalization which 

was being traced through the word “digital” was especially apparent after the start 

of Covid-19.  

The third chapter used the method of case study to provide insights from the 

three  United  Nations’  campaigns  which  were  Tell  Everyone (2015),  Choose  Life 

(2020) and Halftime (2023). All three campaigns were purposefully selected from 

three  different  time  periods.  The  case  studies  discovered  that  the  Tell  Everyone 

campaign used a global, top-down broadcast approach with celebrity advocacy and 

educational outreach with an aim of raising awareness and telling the world about 

the launch of the SDG programme. Choose Life Was localized to the UK context, 

using  emotional  storytelling  and  cultural  familiarity  to  drive  climate  action  and 

improve health of citizens in the peak of the Covid-19 pandemic. Halftime integrated 

global  messaging  with  localized 

implementation,  offering  toolkits,  school 

engagement  materials,  and  open-ended  participation  for  communities  worldwide 

stressing  the  importance  of  action  as  the  SDG  has  come  to  its  “halftime”.  The 

comparative analysis proved that there was slow growth of digitalization from the 

first  to  the  third  campaign,  Halftime  being  the  most  digitised  one.  In  2015  the 

  
67 

campaign does show awareness building, the 2020 campaign mainly shows urgency 

and support in times of crises while the 2023 campaign stresses accountability and 

strategic  pivot  toward  participatory  communication  models  rather  than  top-down 

approaches.  

The  political  recommendations  that  followed  emphasized  the  need  to 

strengthen accountability communication through national monitoring mechanisms, 

invest  in  youth-led  and  culturally  relevant  messaging  and  institutionalize 

participatory localization across member states.  

The  hypothesis  was  partially  proved.  Overall,  the  findings  confirm  the 

increasing  role  of  digitalization  in  the  UN’s  communication  strategy.  The  results 

also  confirm  the  hypothesis  about  the  features  such  as  awareness  and  residing 

knowledge about newly introduced SDGs from 2015 to 2017, and that 2018 to 2021 

was described by increasing reach, engagement and support in the period of a global 

health  crisis.  However,  results  reveal  that  the  shift  toward  localization  was  not 

exclusive to recent years (2022-2024), challenging partially the second part of the 

hypothesis. The first part of the hypothesis can be approved since both the content 

analysis  and  case  study  show  increasing  use  of  digital  tools  with  every  year. 

However,  the  second  part  of  the  hypothesis  involving  the  third  time  period  is 

partially disapproved and should be altered. The results can be rephrased in such a 

way: the evolution in communication characteristics—from global awareness (2015 

to 2017), to emotional and crisis-oriented, supporting messaging (2018 - 2021), and 

finally  to  more  inclusive  and  bottom-up  models  (2022-2024)—has  been  evident 

across  content  and campaigns.  Periods  2015  to  2017  and  2018  to  2021  remained 

unchanged as in the hypothesis, however the features of the period 2022 to 2024 was 

altered.  The  assumption  in  the  hypothesis  that  localisation  appeared  only  in  the 

recent years should be disapproved. Localisation was present in all of the years in 

different formats. The 2022 to 2024 period can be framed by increased institutional 

support for participatory initiatives and bottom-up approach.  

68 

Moreover, 

the  research  gap  was  fulfilled  by  analysing 

the  UN's 

communication strategy through the scope of social media and bringing insights and 

novelty into more modern techniques of communication.  

Long term perspectives of the future studies is the long-term effectiveness of 

hybrid  communication  strategies,  as  well  as  future  development  of  digital  tools. 

Future  research  could  also  explore  how  evolving  digital  platforms  like  TikTok, 

Threads, and emerging metaverse environments impact SDG messaging and public 

engagement. 

To  finalise, 

the  research  clearly  outlines 

the  features  of  the  UN 

communication  strategy  from  2015  to  2023.  It  shows  its  evolving  use  of  digital 

platforms,  adaptive  messaging  across  global  and  local  contexts,  and  increasing 

emphasis on inclusive, participatory models.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 

Reference List 

Aririguzoh, S. (2022). Communication competencies, culture and SDGs: effective processes to cross-

cultural communication. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, 9(1), 1-11. 

Bellantuono, L., Monaco, A., Amoroso, N., Aquaro, V., Lombardi, A., Tangaro, S., & Bellotti, R. 

(2022). Sustainable development goals: conceptualization, communication and achievement 

synergies in a complex network framework. Applied Network Science, 7(1), 14. 

De Luca, F., Iaia, L., Mehmood, A., & Vrontis, D. (2022). Can social media improve stakeholder 

engagement and communication of Sustainable Development Goals? A cross-country analysis. 

Technological forecasting and social change, 177, 121525. 

European Environmental Bureau, (2020). Sustainable Development Handbook 

Franson, L. (2018). Communicating sustainability: An analysis of the 2017 United Nations sustainable 

development goals report (Doctoral dissertation, Toronto Metropolitan University). 

Guterres, A. (2024). As crops fail, water sources shrink, countries must deliver on commitments to 

restore degraded ecosystems, land, Secretary-General urges in World Environment Day 

message [Press release]. United Nations.  

Janoušková, S., Hák, T., Nečas, V., & Moldan, B. (2019). Sustainable development—A poorly 

communicated concept by mass media. Another challenge for SDGs?. Sustainability, 11(11), 

3181 

Joseph, N., & Keohane, R. (1977). Power and interdependence. 

Kannengießer, S. (2021). Media reception, media effects and media practices in sustainability 

communication: State of research and research gaps. The Sustainability Communication Reader: 

A Reflective Compendium, 323-338. 

 
Kannengießer, S. (2023). From millennium development goals to sustainable development goals: 

Transforming development communication to sustainability communication. Studies in 

70 

Communication Sciences, 23(1), 121-135. 

Karmasin, M., & Voci, D. (2021). The role of sustainability in media and communication studies’ 

curricula throughout Europe. International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, 22(8), 

42-68. 

Klaverweide, D. M. (2006). Strategic Communication and the United Nations Millennium Development 

Goals (Master's thesis, University of Twente) 

Krippendorff, K. (2018). Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology (4th ed.). SAGE 

Publications. 

Lim, W. M. (2022). The sustainability pyramid: A hierarchical approach to greater sustainability and the 

United Nations sustainable development goals with implications for marketing theory, practice, 

and public policy. Australasian Marketing Journal, 30(2), 142-150 

Looser, S., Mohr, S., & Wehrmeyer, W. (2019). Crises communication vs. United Nation sustainable 

development goals: The 7S paradigm as feasible solution facilitator. International Journal, 3(3), 

63 

McLeod, S., & Marshall, J. (2023). Communication for all and the Sustainable Development Goals. 

International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 25(1), 1-8. 

Mefalopulos, P. (2005). Communication for sustainable development: applications and challenges. 

Media and glocal change. Rethinking communication for development, 247-260. 

Mulholland, E. (2019). Communicating sustainable development and the SDGs in Europe: good practice 

examples from policy, academia, NGOs and media. ESDN quarterly report, 51, 1-22. 

Mulholland, E., Bernardo, A., & Berger, G. (2017). Communication and awareness raising in the 

implementation of the 2030 agenda and the SDGs: Activities and challenges. ESDN Quarterly 

Report, 44, 1-49. 

Neuendorf, K. A. (2017). The Content Analysis Guidebook (2nd ed.). SAGE Publications. 

Project Everyone. (2025). Impact report. https://project-everyone.org/wp-

content/uploads/2025/01/HS471-PE-Impact-Report_Digital-FINAL.pdf 

71 

Przeworski, A., & Wallerstein, M. (1982). The structure of class conflict in democratic capitalist 

societies. American Political Science Review, 76(2), 215-238. 

Sachs, J. D. (2015). Achieving the sustainable development goals. Journal of International Business 

Ethics, 8(2), 53-62. 

Saxena, K. (2017). 'Telling Everyone'the Media Narrative of the United Nations Sustainable 

Development Goals: Are They Reaching Everyone? (Master's thesis, University of Oregon). 

Schramm, W. (1964). Mass media and national development: The role of information in the developing 

countries (Vol. 65). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 

Servaes, J. (2003). Approaches to Development Communication. Paris: UNESCO. Available at: 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000135752 

Tellis, W. (1997). Application of a case study methodology. The qualitative report, 3(3), 1-19. 

The Global Goals. (2020). Choose life. https://www.globalgoals.org/news/choose-life/ 

Thomas, S. (2023). Sustainability Communication And Credibility: Navigating The Path To A Greener 

Future 

United Nations [@UN]. (2015). #GlobalGoals 6: achieve universal & equitable access to safe & 

affordable drinking water. [Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). 

https://x.com/UN/status/662178805579034624 

United Nations [@UN]. (2016). People Planet Prosperity [Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). 

https://x.com/UN/status/682925516190437376 

United Nations [@UN]. (2017). Sustainable consumption and production ensures a better quality of life 

for all. [Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). https://x.com/un/status/933743447936249857 

United Nations [@UN]. (2018). Saturday is the 1st World Creativity & Innovation Day! [Tweet]. X 

(formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/987587236802809856 

72 

United Nations [@UN]. (2019). The world has already used up more resources than can be renewed in 

2019. [Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/1155916651973492738 

United Nations [@UN]. (2020). 2020 marks the 5th anniversary of the #GlobalGoals. [Tweet]. X 

(formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/1216405226220994560 

United Nations [@UN]. (2021). Don’t miss musical performance by special guests @BTS_twt at 

UNHQ![Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/1439666853580660737 

United Nations [@UN]. (2022). Greater ambition & urgency are needed to achieve the 

#GlobalGoals.[Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/1534929312339505154 

United Nations [@UN]. (2023). In 2023, civilian casualties in armed conflicts rose by 72% - the highest 

since 2015. [Tweet]. X (formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/1807021697876247036 

United Nations [@UN]. (2024). Sustainable, inclusive development hinges on peace. [Tweet]. X 

(formerly Twitter). https://x.com/UN/status/1755577720657018921 

United Nations General Assembly. (2018, May 31). Repositioning of the United Nations development 

system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities 

for development (A/RES/72/279). United Nations. https://undocs.org/en/A/RES/72/279 

United Nations Sustainable Development Group. (2022). Guidelines for Communications and Advocacy 

Strategy for Cooperation Framework. United Nations. Retrieved from 

https://unsdg.un.org/sites/default/files/2022-02/EN-UNSDG-Guidelines-for-Communications-

Advocacy-Strategy-for-Cooperation-Framework.pdf 

United Nations. (2015). Just out: The 2015 SD in Action Report on progress of multi-stakeholder 

partnerships [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/story.php?id=215269391821386&story_fbid=1077632938918356 

United Nations. (2015). The #GlobalGoals for Sustainable Development are projected at the the SM 

Mall of Asia. [Photograph]. Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/p/9giUzwTDHb/ 

United Nations. (2016). #TBT: Actress/animal activist Kristin Davis show her support for Sustainable 

Development Goal 15. [Photograph]. Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/p/BCyMxQ8zDOL/ 

United Nations. (2016). Happy United Nations Day! [Status update]. Facebook. 

73 

https://www.facebook.com/unitednations/posts/happy-united-nations-day-as-the-un-turns-71-

were-asking-for-your-help-to-achieve/10154670069820820/ 

United Nations. (2016). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2016. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. 

https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2016/the%20sustainable%20development%20goals%20report

%202016.pdf 

United Nations. (2017). Say "hello" to these young women in #SouthAfrica . [Photograph]. Instagram. 

https://www.instagram.com/p/Bb8C9Q_jBMh/ 

United Nations. (2017). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2017. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. 

https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/files/report/2017/thesustainabledevelopmentgoalsreport2017.pdf 

United Nations. (2018). "No matter who you are, where you’re from, your skin colour, gender identity: 

speak yourself”.[Photograph]. Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/p/BoIHk1_jwXd/ 

United Nations. (2018). A collage of the best UN photos from around the world from 2017, forming an 

image of UN Headquarters in New York City. [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/story.php?id=54779960819&story_fbid=10156135337655820 

United Nations. (2018). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2018. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. 

https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/files/report/2018/thesustainabledevelopmentgoalsreport2018-en.pdf 

United Nations. (2018). UN SDG Action Campaign's post. [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/story.php/?id=9053837495&story_fbid=10156133037837496 

United Nations. (2019). #UnitedNations Deputy Secretary-General @aminajmohammed in the #UNGA 

[Photograph]. Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/p/B2sjpaNB4Xm/ 

United Nations. (2019). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2019. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2019/The-Sustainable-

74 

Development-Goals-Report-2019.pdf 

United Nations. (2020). A young girl covers her face with a mask in #Yemen. [Photograph]. Instagram. 

https://www.instagram.com/p/CHy4vn_B1BH/ 

United Nations. (2020). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2020/The-Sustainable-

Development-Goals-Report-2020.pdf 

United Nations. (2020). UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network's post [Status update]. 

Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/story.php?id=598896256804325&story_fbid=3710520965641823 

United Nations. (2021).  @f1 World Champion and sustainability entrepreneur @nicorosberg . 

[Photograph]. Instagram.https://www.instagram.com/p/CV7il99M-Hy/ 

United Nations. (2021). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2021. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2021/The-Sustainable-

Development-Goals-Report-2021.pdf 

United Nations. (2021). United Nations's post. [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/story.php?anchor_composer=false&id=54779960819&story_fbid=10

160168620585820 

United Nations. (2022). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2022. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2022/ 

United Nations. (2022). The world has witnessed a major breakthrough for our planet. [Reel]. 

Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/reel/CgwnPVogJE_/ 

United Nations. (2023). Eight years ago, countries gathered in this same #UNGA Hall  [Photograph]. 

Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/p/CxWBiFALFLv/ 

United Nations. (2023). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2023/The-Sustainable-

75 

Development-Goals-Report-2023.pdf 

United Nations. (2023). United Nations's post.  [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/unitednations/posts/ahead-of-mondays-sdg-summit-the-night-sky-

over-un-headquarters-in-new-york-light/700443278778367/ 

United Nations. (2024). Global Goals for Sustainable Development's post. [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/story.php/?id=100064932272176&story_fbid=882611033913298 

United Nations. (2024). Global Goals for Sustainable Development's post. [Status update]. Facebook. 

https://www.facebook.com/UNBonn/posts/in-2022-the-global-week-to-act4sdgs-mobilized-142-

million-sdg-actions-from-all-o/1086552829623543/ 

United Nations. (2024). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024. United Nations Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2024/The-Sustainable-

Development-Goals-Report-2024.pdf 

United Nations. (2025). Blazing temperatures in 2024 require trailblazing climate action. [Status 

update]. Facebook. https://www.facebook.com/unitednations/posts/blazing-temperatures-in-

2024-require-trail-blazing-climateaction-in-2025as-world/1019276636895028/ 

United Nations. (2025). The Sustainable Development Goals are our blueprint. [Photograph]. 

Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/p/DGlKoeSubfQ/ 

Van Norren, D. E. (2012). The Wheel of Development: the Millennium Development Goals as a 

communication and development tool. Third World Quarterly, 33(5), 825-836. 

WCED, S. W. S. (1987). World commission on environment and development. Our common future, 

17(1), 1-91. 

Weder, F., Karmasin, M., Krainer, L., & Voci, D. (2021). Sustainability communication as a critical 

perspective in media and communication studies—An introduction. The sustainability 

communication reader: A reflective compendium, 1-12. 

Whittingham, K. L., Earle, A. G., Leyva-de la Hiz, D. I., & Argiolas, A. (2023). The impact of the 

United Nations Sustainable Development Goals on corporate sustainability reporting. BRQ 

76 

Business Research Quarterly, 26(1), 45-61 

World’s Largest Lesson. (2023, August). Halftime talk for the Global Goals: Lesson plan. Project 

Everyone. https://worldslargestlesson.globalgoals.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Lesson-Plan-

Halftime-Talk-for-the-Global-Goals-1.pd 

Wu, J., Guo, S., Huang, H., Liu, W., & Xiang, Y. (2018). Information and communications technologies 

for sustainable development goals: state-of-the-art, needs and perspectives. IEEE 

Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 20(3), 2389-2406. 

Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods. Sage publications. 

Yusha'u, M. J., & Servaes, J. (Eds.). (2021). The Palgrave handbook of international communication 

and sustainable development (Vol. 6). Palgrave Macmillan 

Zuev, V., Ostrovskaya, E., & Frolova, E. (2017). Sustainable economy: Do not use the debt widely. 

International Organisations Research Journal, 12(4), 68-90. 

*To comply with the regulations of the Russian Federation, please note that Meta Platforms, 
Inc., the parent company of Facebook and Instagram, is recognized as an extremist organization 
and its activities are prohibited on the territory of the Russian Federation. All references to these 
platforms are included in this research for academic purposes only. 

 
 
 
 
