THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

STATE BUDGETARY HIGHER EDUCATION UNIT 

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY 

«HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS» 

  FACULTY OF WORLD ECONOMY AND WORLD POLITICS 

International Program 'International Relations and Global Studies' 

Thesis Paper 

On the topic : 

«The KSA's Entry into BRICS: Impact of Joining the Organization on Saudi 

Arabia's Foreign Policy» 

By the student  

of the 4th year, 

group 212 

Artem Korsakov 

Academic supervisor:  

Andrei Zeltyn 

MOSCOW 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

2 

1. Introduction....................................................................................................................3 
1.1 Relevance................................................................................................................. 3 
1.2 Literature Review..................................................................................................... 4 
1.3 Research Gap..........................................................................................................11 
1.4 Research Question & Hypothesis...........................................................................12 
1.5 Methodology...........................................................................................................13 
1.6 Structure................................................................................................................. 14 
2. The Theoretical Basis. BRICS as an International Organization........................... 16 
2.2 The Role and Place of International Organizations In the System of International 
Relations.......................................................................................................................17 
2.3 The History of Creation and Role of BRICS in the Company of Other International 
Organizations............................................................................................................... 20 
2.4 The Processes and Stages of BRICS Expansion.....................................................23 
3. Prospects for Saudi Arabia's Cooperation Within the Framework of BRICS...... 28 
3.1 Reasons for the Desire and Intention of the KSA to Join BRICS........................... 29 
3.1.1 Expanding Trade Interactions....................................................................... 30 
3.1.2 Diversification of Investment Partners and Attraction of New FDI..............32 
3.1.3 De-dollarization and Alternative Financial Mechanisms............................. 34 
3.1.4 Balancing the Relations Between East and West. Geopolitical 
Considerations........................................................................................................ 37 

3.2 Reasons and Factors Preventing Full Integration and Full-Fledged Entry into 
BRICS........................................................................................................................... 41 
3.2.1 Strong Security Ties with the United States. Risk of Alienating Western Allies.
42 
3.2.2 Conflict of Interest Between BRICS Members............................................... 46 
3.2.3 Limited Integration into BRICS Financial Mechanisms. Dependence on 
Western Financial Institutions................................................................................ 49 
3.2.4 The BRICS Energy Policy May Not Coincide with the Interests of Saudi 
Arabia..................................................................................................................... 53 
3.3 Conclusion On the Chapter....................................................................................57 

4. Internal Political Factors and Foreign Policy Context As Driving Forces and 
Obstacles to Saudi Arabia's Entry Into BRICS............................................................61 

4.1 The Internal Context: The Struggle of the Elites, Reforms and Economic 
Constraints. How Does This Affect Integration with BRICS....................................... 62 
4.2 The Foreign Policy Factor Behind the Idea of Integration with BRICS................69 
4.3 Why Has Saudi Arabia Not Fully Joined BRICS Yet?............................................76 
4.4 Conclusion On the Chapter....................................................................................81 
5. Conclusion.................................................................................................................... 83 
6. Reference List / Bibliography..................................................................................... 88 

 
3 

1. Introduction 

1.1 Relevance 

It  is  fair  to  say  that  the  landscape  of  international  relations  and  global 

interactions  is  indeed  volatile  and  subject  to  major  changes.  These  changes  are 

constant and the active dynamics can be traced on a daily basis. In recent years, the 

world  has  witnessed  the  growing  role  of  international  organizations  and 

international  institutions.  In  particular,  BRICS  block is an example. Over the past 

few  years,  the  organization  has  expanded  significantly  and  continues  to  build  its 

policy.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  latest  news  from  the  15th  BRICS  summit  in 

August  2023  about  the  invitation  of  6  more  new  countries  to  the  organization, 

according  to  INDEPENDENT  reports  (2023).  Saudi  Arabia  is  one  of  those 

countries. Its potential entry into the BRICS group is an important event to analyze 

in  the  context  of  the  transformation  of  the  global  order  and  the  world  order  as  a 

whole, since with the expansion of the organization, it will account for about 46% 

of  the  world's  population,  28%  of  the  global  economy  along  with  25%  of  world 

trade, as well as 36% of global GDP, as stated by Holtzmann (2024). As one of the 

largest  oil  producers  and  the  most  important  player  in  the  Middle  East,  Saudi 

Arabia  can  become  part  of  an  association  that  positions  itself  as  an alternative to 

Western economic and political institutions. An analysis of the prospects for Saudi 

Arabia's  cooperation  with  BRICS  and  the  possible  impact  of  this  process  on  the 

country's  foreign  policy  is  important  for  understanding  the  changing  balance  of 

power  on  the  world  stage.  First  of  all,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  analysis  of 

potential  accession  and  prospects  for  developments  in  this  area  is  extremely 

interesting  from  the  point  of  view  of  studying  international  relations, since Saudi 

Arabia  is  one  of  the  key  actors  in  the  Middle  East  that  determine  the  policy  and 

course of development from this region. Moreover, the very potential membership 

in an international organization may have consequences for the Kingdom as one of 

the  main  allies  of  the  United  States,  whose  opposite  character  BRICS  seeks  to 

develop.  That  is  why such a study is extremely relevant and necessary in order to 

 
find  and  identify  possible  fluctuations  in  the foreign policy of the chosen country 

4 

after its potential participation in BRICS. 

1.2 Literature Review 

Further,  as  part  of  the  research  work  in  the  chosen  field,  it  is  necessary  to 

consider weighty and relevant scientific articles within the framework of a literary 

review. 

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  literary  review,  it  will  be  very  appropriate  to 

consider some theoretical works that focus more on the evolution and dynamics of 

the  world  order  as  a  whole,  rather  than  on  some  more  specific  cases  and  niche 

dynamics.  Such  articles  can  provide  an  important  understanding  of  the  general 

concept  and  current  global  trends,  which  is  important  in  this  study.  This,  in turn, 

will  provide  a  certain  starting  point.  For  example,  the  work  of  Peters  (2022)  is 

"The  emerging  multipolar  world  order:  A  preliminary  analysis.  Educational 

Philosophy  and  Theory"  offers  a  critical  analysis  of  the  changing  dynamics  of 

global  power  and dynamics in general. This work extensively traces the transition 

from  the  bipolar  structure  of  the  Cold  War  to  the unipolar period after the end of 

the  Cold  War,  dominated  by  the  United  States.  However,  recently  the  author  has 

again  noticed  the  transition  to  an  increasingly  complex  multipolar  system.  Peters 

draws  on  the  ideas  of  European  Commission  Vice  President  Josep  Borrell,  who 

describes  the  world's  transition  to  different  configurations  of  power  -  bipolarity 

from  1945  to  1989,  unipolarity  from  1989  to  2008,  and  what  he  calls  "complex 

multipolarity"  in  the  modern  era.  The  author  also  notes  the  significant  growing 

influence  of  BRICS,  thereby  emphasizing  the  redistribution  of  global  economic 

influence  in  favour  of  the  transatlantic  powers.  Conceptually,  Peters  relies  on 

Wallerstein's  world-systems  theory,  which  considers  global  capitalism  as  an 

evolving system of core-peripheral relations. He argues that the current multipolar 

order represents a modification rather than a radical departure from this system, as 

power  blocs  such  as  BRICS  seek  to  challenge  the  long-standing  economic 

dominance of Western institutions. 

 
5 

Next  is  the  work  by  Artner  and  Yin  (2023),  which  is  called  "Towards  a 

non-hegemonic world order – emancipation and the political agency of the Global 

South  in  a  changing  world  order".  It  examines  the  role  of  the  Global  South  in 

shaping  a  multipolar  world.  The  authors  argue  that  traditional  theories  of 

international  relations  have  mainly  focused  on  the  dominant  Powers,  thereby 

ignoring the constructive role of the Global South, whose growing role now largely 

determines the world order. Moreover, the scientific work explores the processes of 

nation-building,  economic  cooperation  and  political  resistance  in  these  countries. 

Also, the main topic of the article is the dialectical relationship between the will to 

dominate  and  the  will  to  resist.  Artner  and  Yin  examine  this  dynamic  in  the 

historical  context  of  colonialism  and  decolonization.  In addition, it is emphasized 

that  the  political  movements  of  the  Global  South  are  inherently  internationalist, 

since  their  struggle  against  Western  imperialism  and  economic  dependence  has 

always been interconnected. 

After  the  more  theoretical  articles,  it  is  worth  mentioning  something  more 

specific  in  terms  of  the  chosen  direction  of  this  scientific  research.  The  study  by 

Malik, Kohar, and Tungkagi (2024) - "BRICS Expansion in the Middle East from a 

Political  Economy  Perspective",  which  contains  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the 

causes,  dynamics,  and  consequences  of  BRICS  expansion  into  the  Middle  East 

through  the  lens  of  political  economy.  In  this  work,  using  qualitative  analysis 

methods,  the  authors  describe  and  explore  exactly  how  BRICS  interacts  with  the 

Middle  East  region  and  how  its initiatives and plans challenge the existing global 

dynamics  of  influence,  dominated  by  Western  institutions.  The  authors  highlight 

and reveal BRICS initiatives to ensure the security of energy resources, as well as 

the  expansion  of  their  political  and  economic  influence  in  the  region  to  ensure 

more  global  ambitions  to  challenge  the  hegemony  of  the  West.  The  article  also 

highlights  the  desire  of  developing  and  emerging  economies  in  the  world  to 

participate  more  fully,  as  well  as  to  have  the  ability  to  have  authority  in 

decision-making  processes.  The  authors  consider  the  Middle  Eastern  countries as 

an  impulse  and  an  essential  element  in  achieving  common  goals.  However,  it  is 

 
6 

worth  mentioning  that  this  study  does  not  focus  specifically on Saudi Arabia and 

does  not  exclusively  consider  its  motives  and  ambitions,  which  provides  some 

opportunity  to  study  and  explore  this  element  from  the  perspective  chosen  in the 

work. 

Padraig,  Carmody (2024) discusses a similar idea in their article. This work 

provides  a  convincing  analysis  of  the  consequences  of  BRICS  expansion  in  the 

context  of  ongoing  global  geopolitical  challenges  and  economic  shifts.  The 

expansion  of  the  organization,  including  the  admission  of  a  number  of  countries, 

including  Saudi  Arabia,  is  considered  and  analyzed  as  an  important  event 

reflecting  more  serious  challenges  to  the  liberal  international  order  and  the 

increasing  competition  between  major  powers,  in  particular  the  West  and  China 

and Russia. However, the opposition to Western domination is viewed a little more 

broadly here, not only from the point of view of political economy. The opposition 

to Western hegemony is affected here through the creation of financial mechanisms 

such  as  the  New  Development  Bank  (NDB),  as  well  as  the  desire  for  broader 

representation of the countries of the Global South in international institutions. The 

authors  also  criticize  the  internal problems of BRICS, noting that the inclusion of 

ideologically  and  politically  diverse  countries  may  weaken  the  group's  ability  to 

reach consensus and overall coherence for further development. Nevertheless, it is 

recognized  that  despite  these  differences,  BRICS  members  share  a  common 

interest  in  revising  the  existing  international  order,  which  can  stimulate  future 

rounds of expansion and cooperation. 

Barbary's  (2024)  work  “The  Impact  of  Saudi  Arabia's Accession to BRICS 

Bloc  on  the  Performance  of  Saudi  Exports”  examines  how  the  Kingdom's 

accession to BRICS will affect the dynamics of its trade. The author's conclusions 

indicate a limited impact of the role of a country's membership in the organization 

on  its  economic  component,  which is confirmed, for example, by the fact that the 

KSA  switched  to  a  positive  trade  balance  with  the  BRICS  countries  only  in 

2021-2022, but the study itself did not reveal a statistically significant relationship 

between  the  overall  trade  balance  of  Saudi  Arabia  and  its  trade  with  the  BRICS 

 
7 

countries.  Moreover,  Barbary  reviewed  the  overall  export  situation,  which  is 

certainly  dominated  by  oil,  and  found  that  even  the  signing  of  the  regional  trade 

agreement  (RTA)  or  preferential  trade  agreement  (PTA)  within BRICS would not 

lead to a significant increase in Saudi Arabia's exports due to low tariff barriers on 

oil and the low cost of non-oil exports. Moreover, the study also examines potential 

changes  in  imports,  as  imports  from  the  BRICS  countries  are  diverse  and 

significant.  But  Saudi  Arabia's  high-income status and liberal import policy mean 

that  BRICS  membership  is  unlikely  to  dramatically  change  the  country's  import 

trends. 

Moreover,  Valamontes’  (2024)  analysis  provides  a  comprehensive  study  of 

Saudi  Arabia's  strategic  ambitions  and  plans  in  connection  with  its  potential 

membership  in  BRICS.  The  article  examines this aspect in the broader context of 

global  economic  shifts  and  geopolitical  restructuring.  The  author  emphasizes  the 

relationship  between  economic  diversification,  energy  market  dynamics,  and 

regional  security  issues.  One  of  the  key  aspects  considered  in  the  paper  is  the 

balancing  of  the  KSA  between  full-fledged  accession  to  BRICS  and  the 

preservation  of  its  traditional  security  partnerships  with  the  United  States.  This 

balancing act is fully reflected in the Kingdom's hesitancy to fully integrate into the 

organization, especially in connection with the aggravation of regional security and 

the escalation of tensions between Israel and Iran. Valamontes says Saudi Arabia is 

still  dependent  on  and  needs  U.S.  security  guarantees,  especially  amid 

infrastructural threats due to escalating tensions in the region. Moreover, the author 

considers  the  possibility  of  contributing  to  the  diversification  of  the  Kingdom's 

economy  by  joining  BRICS.  The  analysis  concludes  that  joining  the  KSA  could 

accelerate  changes  in  global  trade  practices  and  redefine  economic  alliances, 

especially  in  the  Global  South.  However,  the  study  highlights  that  the  success  of 

these  initiatives  will  depend  on  Saudi  Arabia's  ability  to  navigate  its  complex 

geopolitical  landscape  and  balance  competing  priorities  between  traditional  allies 

and new partners. 

 
8 

Katz's  (2024)  article  examines  in  more  detail  the  expansion  of  BRICS  by 

including  new  member  countries,  including  potential  Saudi  Arabia.  The  author 

critically analyzes the geopolitical significance of such an expansion and examines 

the  internal  dynamics  of  the  organization.  Katz  draws  attention  to  the  internal 

contradictions  and  existing  tensions  within  BRICS,  which can significantly affect 

the  final  outcome  of  their  formation  and expansion.: There are both opportunities 

for  global  multipolarity  and  significant  challenges  arising  from 

internal 

disagreements.  The  author  identifies  two  groups,  which  indicate  the  division 

between  countries  that  fundamentally  oppose  Western  influence,  such  as  Russia, 

China  and  Iran  (the  first  group),  and  those  who maintain ties of cooperation with 

the  West  in  the  possible  presence  of  some  differences,  including  India,  Saudi 

Arabia  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates  (conditionally  the  second  group).  Such 

division  undermines  the  idea  of  a  single  cohesive  alliance,  which  is  meant  as  a 

counterweight  to  Western  hegemony.  Moreover,  the  article  focuses  on  various 

regional tensions, such as tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia, and others that 

may hinder the bloc's ability to act in concert on global or regional issues. 

Dr. Abdulaziz Sager (2024), by the way, demonstrates a much more focused 

study specifically on Saudi Arabia in his work, which offers an in-depth analysis of 

the  Kingdom's  changing  role  in  the  global  order.  Special  attention  is  paid  to  its 

pragmatic  foreign  policy  strategies  and  the  study  of  multilateral  partnerships, 

especially within the framework of BRICS. The study considers the Kingdom as an 

emerging  middle  power  that  is  navigating  a  rapidly  changing  geopolitical 

landscape, using its economic might, regional influence, and global partnerships to 

actively participate in shaping a new world order. Sager considers joining the KSA 

from  the  point  of  view  of  energy  security  and  strengthening  global  governance 

within the bloc, moreover, the Kingdom's very participation in BRICS would allow 

it  to  contribute  to  the  de-dollarization  program  by  facilitating  trade  in  alternative 

currencies.  The  author  also  emphasizes  that  with  the  expansion of the bloc to the 

Middle East, it will be possible to test new models of inclusive multilateralism that 

 
9 

reflect  the  needs  of  the  countries  of  the  Global  South  in  a  more  transparent  and 

representative system of global governance. 

Another  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  expansion  of  BRICS  membership, 

namely  its consequences and opportunities in the article “BRICS Expansion: New 

Geographies  and  Spheres  of  Cooperation”  Lissovolik  studies  (2024).  Paying 

special  attention  to  the  economic,  institutional  and  regional  components.  The 

author  assesses  how  the  inclusion  of  new  members  from  the  Global  South 

(including  Saudi  Arabia)  enhances  the  potential  of  BRICS  in  addressing  the 

development  challenges  on  the  agenda,  while  emphasizing the need for structural 

and policy reforms necessary to optimize its effectiveness. The central theme of the 

scholar's  research  is  the  transformation  of  the  BRICS  bloc  into  a  more  inclusive 

platform,  which  is  continuously linked to its expansion in January 2024, allowing 

the  development  of  organizational  institutions  whose  success  directly  depends on 

reforming  their  structures  and  organizational  components  to  better  meet  the 

macroeconomic  needs  of  the  Global  South.  Moreover,  Lissovolik  examines  the 

economic priorities of BRICS enlargement, in particular the potential for reducing 

trade  and  investment  barriers  within  the  Global  South,  which  emphasizes  the 

importance  of  trade  liberalization  and  macroeconomic policy coordination for the 

development of the member states. 

The following study already has a distinct approach, which looks more at the 

internal  aspect  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  BRICS  member  countries  and 

potential  members.  Abdeldayem  and  Kswat's  (2024)  provide  a  comprehensive 

analysis  of  how  media  reports  in  the  BRICS  member  countries  shape  public 

opinion and political discourse related to the bloc's activities. A qualitative analysis 

method  for  studying  news  trends  offers  consideration  of  geopolitical  interests, 

domestic  politics,  and  global  diplomacy.  The  key  point  of the study is the role of 

the  media  in  shaping  the  image  of  BRICS  as  a  geopolitical  and  economic  entity. 

The authors emphasize and highlight the economic importance of media frames. It 

is  noted  that  although  economic  trends  and  financial  cooperation  are  important 

topics,  analysis  of  changes  in  specific  sectors  or  the  economic  consequences  of 

 
10 

policy  decisions  is  limited.  Moreover,  the  article  provides  some  conclusions  that 

describe  the  role  of  the  media  in  raising  awareness  and  establishing  a  dialogue 

about the expansion of BRICS. 

In  an  article  by  Holtzmann  (2024),  “BRICS  enlightenment  -  a “non-event” 

or  a  stage  victory  against  the  West?"  The  recent expansion of BRICS is critically 

analyzed.  The  article  examines 

its  geopolitical  consequences, 

internal 

contradictions,  and  the  strategic  initiatives  it  requires  from  Western  powers.  The 

main topic of the analysis in the framework of the study is the dual role of BRICS 

as  a  symbol  of  the  empowerment  of  the  Global  South  and  a  platform  for 

geopolitical competition. The inclusion of new members such as Saudi Arabia and 

others is seen as a strategic step aimed at strengthening the economic and political 

influence  of  the  bloc.  From  the  point  of  view  of  Saudi  Arabia,  Holtzmann  has  a 

very  limited  view  of  the  country's  interests  in  integrating  with  the  bloc,  which, 

according  to  him,  will help strengthen the KSA's geopolitical role both within the 

region  and  in the global geopolitical arena. Moreover, the Kingdom is looking for 

ways  to  diversify  and  improve  its  own  economy.  The  article  emphasizes  that  the 

BRICS  countries are interested in strengthening economic cooperation to promote 

and  protect  sales and procurement markets within the bloc. In particular, there are 

efforts  to  create  alternatives  to  Western-dominated  financial  systems.  Holtzmann 

calls  the  expansion  of  BRICS  a  wake-up  call  for  the  West,  urging  it  to  turn  its 

attention to the growing influence of the Global South. 

Kamin and Langhammer (2024) consider the growing influence and gradual 

strengthening of BRICS bloc through its expansion to BRICS+ in their article. The 

expansion of the block is considered in terms of geo-economic potential, as well as 

global  positioning.  The  authors  contrast  this  with  the  dominance  of  the  G7.  Its 

superiority  over  the  G7  countries  in  terms  of  the  share  of  GDP  measured  by 

purchasing  power  parity  (PPP), in addition to expanding its influence, which now 

covers  a  significant  proportion  of  the  world's  population  and  a  significant 

proportion of natural resources. This highlights its growing importance in changing 

global  trade  and  economic  dynamics.  The  inclusion  of  countries  such  as  Saudi 

 
11 

Arabia  is  viewed  from  the  perspective  of  significantly  strengthening  the  bloc's 

strategic control over global energy markets. In addition, the article argues that the 

wealth  of  resources  of  the  new  members  is  consistent  with  the  goal of BRICS to 

reduce dependence on financial systems dominated by the West and the dollar. The 

authors  call  the  expansion  a  "wake-up  call"  for  Western  powers,  urging  them  to 

resume diplomatic and economic cooperation with the BRICS countries. 

Based  on  the  scientific  articles  and  literature  reviewed  in  the  study,  it  is 

worth  noting  that  there  is  some  similarity  among  them,  which  is  reflected  in  the 

consideration of the invited or joined BRICS countries (of which Saudi Arabia is a 

part)  together  or  in  groups.  There  is  a  noticeable  lack  of  concrete  analysis solely 

from  the  position  of  the  Kingdom,  touching  upon  important  aspects  such  as  the 

KSA's foreign policy towards the countries of the region and relations with partner 

countries at the global level (such as the United States). This, in turn, leaves some 

field for scientific research. 

1.3 Research Gap 

Studying the prospects of Saudi Arabia's accession to BRICS and its impact 

on  the  Kingdom's  foreign  policy  is  a  very  relevant  and  insufficiently  studied 

problem in the field of international relations. Despite the increased interest in the 

expansion of BRICS and the participation of new potential members such as Saudi 

Arabia  in  this  block  and active dynamics in there, there is a significant gap in the 

scientific  literature in analyzing the long-term consequences and some forecasting 

for  the  foreign  policy  strategy  specifically  within  the  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia. 

Most  of  the  existing  scientific  research  on  the  chosen  international  organization 

focuses  primarily  on  the  founding  countries  and  their  role  in  world  politics  and 

economics,  as  well  as  on  more  global  interactions  and  global  fluctuations. 

Moreover,  scientific  articles  often  lack  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  prospects  for 

Saudi  Arabia's  cooperation  with  BRICS,  as  well  as  a  direct  impact  on  the 

Kingdom's foreign policy after its potential accession. In addition, the very novelty 

and  freshness  of  such  news  once  again  confirms  the  lack of scientific research in 

 
12 

the  chosen  field  due  to  the  high  degree  of  variability  and  the  very  nature  of 

international relations, especially today.  

Moreover,  within  the  framework  of  this  research,  it  is  planned  to  consider 

the  interactions between Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates as two rivals 

in  the  Middle  East  region.  The  UAE  has  already  successfully joined BRICS, and 

the  KSA  is  still  in the process of considering an invitation to join the association. 

However,  earlier,  the  Kingdom, like its neighbor, expressed a desire to join, so an 

invitation  was sent to him. This situation is directly related to the competitiveness 

of  Middle  East  politics  between  the  two  countries,  and this study is also going to 

consider  the factor of Abu Dhabi joining BRICS and Saudi Arabia's desire to join 

there,  since  Riyadh  clearly  does  not  want  to  lag  behind  its  regional  rival.  Since 

there  is  a  limited  number of scientific studies on this aspect, this paper also seeks 

to close this gap in the scientific environment. 

Finally,  there  is  a  very  limited  amount  of  research  on  the  integration  of 

BRICS  into  the  Middle  East  context  from  the  perspective  of  one  of  its  largest 

players, Saudi Arabia. It is the Kingdom that plays a key role in this region, and its 

cooperation  and participation in BRICS can have a significant impact on relations 

with  actors  both  in  the  Middle  East  and  in  the  global  context.  It  is  crucial  to 

highlight  and  explore  the  implications  for  regional  policy,  including  security, 

energy,  and  economic  cooperation.  and  the  relationship  with  other  actors  on  the 

part of Saudi Arabia. 

1.4 Research Question & Hypothesis 

Before  starting  the  paper,  the  following  research  question  was  posed:  To 

what extent can Saudi Arabia’s accession to BRICS affect the course of its foreign 

policy and relations with key forces in the Middle East region? 

After the question was posed, a hypothesis was formulated, the confirmation 

or  refutation  of  which  is  to  be  found  out  in  the  results  of  the  research:  Saudi 

Arabia’s accession to BRICS will result in a measurable reorientation of its foreign 

policy,  marked  by  a  strategic  diversification  of  alliances  beyond  the  traditional 

 
13 

Western  axis.  This  shift  will  manifest  through  increased  economic  and  political 

cooperation with BRICS member states, a recalibration of regional influence in the 

Middle  East,  and  a  gradual  reconfiguration  of  its  security  and  financial 

dependencies—while  balancing  its  existing  partnerships,  particularly  with  the 

United States. 

1.5 Methodology 

As  a  methodology,  a  qualitative  thematic  approach  is  best  suited  for  this 

research to study the main topic – the impact of Saudi Arabia's accession to BRICS 

on  the  country's  foreign  policy.  It  was  decided  to  use  the  theoretical traditions of 

realism  and  liberal  institutionalism  in  the  field  of  international  relations  as  a 

methodological  framework.  Together,  these  two  theories  provide  a  dual  approach 

to  analyzing  both  strategic  security  considerations  and  the  inheritance of national 

interests,  as  well  as 

institutional  cooperation 

to  obtain  benefits  through 

international  interactions.  Realism,  in  turn,  is  used  to  interpret  Saudi  Arabia's 

strategic interests in balancing between its traditional alliances (especially with the 

United  States)  and  emerging  BRICS  partnerships.  On  the  other  hand,  liberal 

institutionalism  underlies  the  analysis  of  the  Kingdom's  interest  in  multilateral 

cooperation, institutional diversification and economic integration with developing 

and growing economies, which is particularly present in BRICS. 

One of the main methodological components of this scientific research is the 

case  study.  Saudi  Arabia  is  considered  as  the  main  example,  with  comparative 

references  to  other  new  or  recently  joined  BRICS  members  (such  as  Egypt,  Iran 

and  the  UAE)  to  show  the  motives,  problems  and  consequences  of  integration. 

This  method  allows  you  to  delve  deeply  into  the  specific  dynamics  of  the 

Kingdom's foreign policy in connection with its regional and global conditions, as 

well  as  to  build  causal  relationships  based  on  the  analysis  of  specific  events, 

linking them to the central theme – BRICS and Saudi Arabia's foreign policy. 

Another  important  element  of  the  methodology  will  be  the  analysis  of 

documents  and  policies.  This  includes studying and analyzing official documents, 

 
14 

declarations  of  the  BRICS  summits  (for  example,  Kazan-2024),  government 

statements,  communications  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  press  releases 

from official institutions of states and bilateral agreements, and so on. This method 

will  allow  us  to  study  these  important  resources  and  sources  in  order  to  identify 

formal expressions of intent, a framework for cooperation and strategic guidelines 

that,  with  a  comprehensive  approach,  will  form  the  necessary  understanding  to 

uncover the central theme. 

 Finally, there are extensive plans to use secondary source content analysis in 

the  methodology.  These  sources  include peer-reviewed scientific literature, policy 

documents,  and  reports  from  analytical  centers.  It  can  also  include  investigations 

conducted  on  Saudi  Arabia  by  independent  journalists  and  researchers.  This 

approach  to  working  with  data  will  make  it  possible  to  systematically  analyze 

sources to identify key topics, arguments, and conclusions related to the expansion 

of  BRICS,  as  well  as  immediate  trends  both  at  the  internal and external levels of 

the KSA (i.e., changes in its foreign policy). 

This  methodology  aims 

to  provide  a  comprehensive,  multi-level 

understanding  of  how  the  Kingdom's  international  orientation  and  approach  may 

change in the context of BRICS enlargement by including Riyadh. 

1.6 Structure 

Next,  it  is  necessary  to  proceed  with  the  description of the structure of this 

work.  The  task  is  to  mark  up  the  paper  plan  in  such  a  way  as  to  approach  the 

analysis  of  the  central  topic  of  the  work  in  as  much  detail  as  possible  and  try  to 

find  confirmation  or  refutation  of  the  hypothesis.  Globally,  this  research  will  be 

divided into three chapters. First, a theoretical chapter is planned in which the role 

of  international  organizations  in  the  system  of  international  relations  will  be 

considered, as well as the structure of BRICS and its growing role in global affairs. 

The history of the formation of BRICS and the stages of expansion of this informal 

association of the world's growing economies will also be considered. This chapter 

aims  to lay and familiarize with the foundation of the BRICS bloc and lead to the 

 
15 

main  part  of  the study, which is directly related to Saudi Arabia and the influence 

of the informal association on the Kingdom's foreign policy. 

The  next important step will be to consider the prospects for Saudi Arabia's 

cooperation  within  the  framework  of  BRICS.  Here,  a  more  detailed  analysis  will 

be devoted to the likely reasons and motivators for Saudi Arabia to join the union, 

as  well  as  direct  attention  to  the  obstacles that most likely hinder full integration. 

This  chapter  is  important  in terms of the impact of factors related to the country's 

integration  into  BRICS,  as  this  entry  has  a  direct  impact  on  many  foreign  policy 

aspects for Saudi Arabia. 

Finally,  in  the  last  chapter,  domestic  political factors and the foreign policy 

context  will  be  described.  They will be analyzed as driving forces and difficulties 

to  Saudi  Arabia's  entry  into  BRICS.  In  this  part,  an  important  point  will  be  to 

consider both levels – external and internal – in order to understand the driving and 

hindering  forces  in  BRICS.  At  this  stage,  an  analysis  will  be  conducted from the 

point  of  view  of  the  head  of  Saudi  Arabia,  Mohammed  bin  Salman,  with  his 

motivations  and  personal goals, which are largely intertwined with the Kingdom's 

foreign  policy  course.  An  overview  and  analogy  with  the  UAE's  path  to  BRICS 

will  be  conducted,  as  well  as  an  answer  to  the  question  of  why  the  KSA has not 

joined  the  association  yet.  The  chapter  is  an  important  and  final  step  in 

understanding  the  impact  of  BRICS  on  Saudi  Arabia's  domestic  policy,  on  its 

relations with key forces in the Middle East, as well as outside the region, with its 

traditional ally and partner, the United States. 

And  at  the  end  of  the  paper,  it  is  planned  to summarize the comprehensive 

analysis  done,  as  well  as  provide  an  answer  to  the  research  question  posed.  The 

hypothesis established at the beginning of the study will also be analyzed in terms 

of confirmation or refutation. 

 
 
 
16 

2. The Theoretical Basis. BRICS as an International Organization 

First  and  foremost, it is worth noting quite an important thing: international 

organizations  and  their  functioning  in  general.  The  concept  of  “international 

organization"  (IO)  has  long  been  a  deeply  rooted  and  well-known  concept  in  the 

framework  of  international  relations  and  global  affairs.  In  an  increasingly 

multipolar  and  dynamic  world  which  we  can  witness  nowadays,  regional  and 

global  organizations  such  as  the  United  Nations  (UN),  the  World  Trade 

Organization  (WTO),  the  European  Union  (EU),  and  BRICS  play  a  crucial  and 

integral role in shaping international norms and promoting economic, political, and 

security  cooperation.  That  is  why  the  study  of  IOs  as  a  phenomenon  remains  an 

important  basis  for  international  relations  and understanding of the modern world 

order  as  a  whole.  It  is  extremely  important  to  consider  the  role  of  individual 

organizations, especially if their growing role and size can be traced, as is currently 

the  case  with  the  BRICS  bloc.  Its  truly  growing  role  and  the  number  of 

participating  member-states  make this group of countries a significant actor in the 

international  arena,  including  among other established international organizations. 

Konyshev & Sergunin (2022) define the BRICS group as a complex and interesting 

phenomenon  that  requires  a  multilateral  approach  to  uncover  the  very  essence  of 

the  state  formation.  They  also  emphasize  the  special  essence  of  the  block  itself, 

trying  to  call  it  a  new type of an international institution, which shows successful 

results  in  the  form  of  its  initiatives,  however,  according  to  the  authors,  it  is  too 

early  to  draw  such  unambiguous conclusions. However, what can be said for sure 

now  is  that  within  the  framework  of  a  study  on  a  chosen  topic,  which  is 

inextricably  linked  to  BRICS,  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  avoid  discussing 

international organizations and their essence in general. This is indeed the case, as 

the BRICS bloc seeks to take root and strengthen itself as a priority and significant 

player  in  the  international  arena  in  order  to  enhance  its  global  status,  and,  as 

Gavrilenko  &  Shenshin  (2024)  argues,  the  transition  to  a  multipolar  world  is 

becoming more and more clearly discussed. 

 
17 

The  purpose  of  this  first  chapter  within  the  scientific  research  is  to  lay  the 

theoretical  foundations  for  understanding  BRICS  as an international organization, 

an  international  institution.  This  chapter  is  intended  to  examine  the  role  of 

international  organizations  in  the  international  system,  because,  as  mentioned 

earlier,  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  international  organizations  are  inextricably 

linked  to  the  topic  of  the  research,  and  their  general  analysis  can  provide  the 

necessary  trends  and  describe  the  current  dynamics  in  international  relations. 

Moreover,  the  chapter  will  also  examine  BRICS  in  the  historical  context  of  its 

creation  and further growth, comparing its structure and essence with other global 

and  regional  institutions  in  order  to  answer  whether  the  bloc  is  a  full-fledged 

international organization. Finally, the chapter will study the expansion process and 

assess the mechanisms and consequences of the expansion of BRICS by attracting 

new, sometimes unexpected members. 

2.2  The  Role  and  Place  of  International  Organizations  In  the  System  of 

International Relations 

The  growing role of international organizations cannot be overlooked. Even 

after  the  Second  World  War,  the  UN  had  already  taken  into  account  the  multiple 

mistakes  of  its  successor,  the  League  of  Nations,  and  had  become  very  firmly 

integrated  in  the  life  of  the  world  system  and  international  relations  as  a  whole. 

The UN still exists, which may indicate a new approach to conducting international 

relations,  which  is  now  being  strengthened  through the creation and development 

of  both  major  players  in the role of global international organizations and smaller 

players in the role of regional organizations. Barkin (2023) looks even further into 

history and evolution, tracing the development of international organizations since 

the  19th  century,  when  early  institutionalized  frameworks  such  as  the  Concert  of 

Europe  and  the  International  Telegraph  Union  were  created.  So,  it  can  be  stated 

that IOs is not a new concept, however this phenomena has been rapidly developed 

over time and in the modern reality it is one of the most important components of 

global affairs. 

 
18 

International organizations undoubtedly play a crucial role in structuring the 

global  system  and  the  world  order  as  a  whole,  promoting  cooperation,  economic 

exchange,  political  stability  and  conflict  resolution  between  states.  Their  very 

emergence  and  continued  existence,  along  with  their  growing  role,  reflects  the 

need for a complex and dynamic global system for institutionalized mechanisms to 

manage  international  affairs.  These  cases  can  include  many  things, such as trade, 

security, or economic development, which are attractive areas for the development 

of States. 

IOs  are  also  the  subjects  of  multiple  studies and discussions on their actual 

role,  critical  analysis,  and  prospects  for  their  development.  One of the scholars is 

Keohane  (1984),  who  in  his  work  on liberal institutionalism described the role of 

international organizations. He emphasised that they help reduce transaction costs, 

facilitate  compliance,  and  promote  interdependence  between  states.  This,  in  turn, 

increases  the  likelihood  of  joint  results  even  in  an  anarchic  international  system. 

Indeed,  such  an  analysis  is  still  relevant,  because  it  is  worth  noting  that  in  the 

modern  world  there  is  a  dynamic  of  complex  interaction  between  actors  on  the 

global  stage.  It  may  be  a  consequence  of  the  ever-growing  globalization,  which 

inevitably  leads  to  increased  interdependence  between  countries,  forcing  them  to 

engage 

in  pragmatic  interaction  and  cooperation.  Nevertheless,  views  on 

international  organizations  vary  significantly 

in  scientific  circles.  Liberal 

institutionalists  emphasize  the  role  of  international  organizations  in  mitigating 

conflicts  and  promoting  integration,  while  realist  scholars  such  as  Mearsheimer 

(1994)  argue  that  international  organizations  serve  simply  as  arenas  for  power 

politics,  where  States  pursue  national  interests  rather  than  collective  well-being. 

Indeed,  such  an  analysis  should  not  be  ruled  out,  because  it  seeks  to  deeply  and 

comprehensively examine the true motives of actors in the international arena who 

seek  to  balance power and pursue national interests, which are primarily achieved 

through  a  zero-sum  game.  This  theoretical  discrepancy  raises  an  extremely 

important question: are international organizations truly independent participants in 

global  governance,  or  are  they  instruments  of  state  power?  This  question  is  truly 

 
19 

fundamental,  because  an  unambiguous  and  clear  answer  to  it  seems  extremely 

difficult,  perhaps  even  impossible.  This  discussion  is  not  the  central  topic  of this 

scientific  study.  However, with further consideration and analysis of the prospects 

for Saudi Arabia's cooperation within the framework of BRICS, it will be possible 

to pay attention to both aspects in the theory of international organizations in order 

to better understand and evaluate interests and initiatives along with their possible 

consequences. 

Furthermore,  an  equally  important  aspect  of  this  subchapter  will  be  to 

evaluate and consider the evolution of international organizations, to consider their 

transition from functionalism to multilateralism, in order to consider in more detail 

the  modern  dynamics  of  international  relations.  Mentioning  the  functional 

approach,  it  is  worth  noting  the  work  of  Haas  (1964),  who  argued  that  technical 

and  economic  cooperation  between  states  promotes  deeper  integration.  This 

eventually leads to political cooperation. His theory suggests some effect, which is 

manifested in the fact that once states cooperate in one area (for example, in trade 

and economic agreements), this often leads to further integration in other areas (for 

example,  in  security  and  political  governance).  Once  again,  we  can  recall  one  of 

the 

trends 

taking 

root 

through  globalization  – 

interdependence  and 

interconnectedness.  This  dynamic  can  be  traced  quite  clearly,  since  states  benefit 

from  such  interactions,  which  can  gradually  develop  into  an  institutional  “shell” 

and  become  an  IO  (or  at  least  an  international  institutional  entity).  Anghel  and 

Jones  (2024)  write  about  the  current  dynamics  of  international  organizations  and 

according  to  the  authors,  international  organizations  that  were  once  considered 

“exclusive  clubs”  are  now  increasingly forced to expand their membership due to 

external  pressure  and  the  changing  international  environment.  Such  an expansion 

certainly  increases  the  level  of  inclusivity,  but  at  the  same  time  creates  problems 

related  to  governance,  decision-making,  and  conflicting  national  interests  within 

such groups. This trend can generally be attributed to BRICS, which was originally 

an  association  of  only  five  states – Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, 

but recently this “club has expanded to a large extent.” Moreover, in concluding on 

 
20 

the  trends  in the dynamics of international organizations in international relations, 

it is worth mentioning the idea of weakening the dominance of global institutions. 

Debre and Dijkstra (2023) consider this idea, arguing that the growth in the number 

of  regional  organizations  marks  a  weakening  of  the  dominance  of  global 

institutions. The scholars assess whether international organizations are in decline. 

They find that although the absolute number remains stable, their relative influence 

has  decreased,  especially  in the context of growing regionalism and multipolarity, 

which  highlights  and  once  again  demonstrates  the  changing  dynamics  of 

organizations in the system of international relations. 

2.3  The  History  of  Creation  and  Role  of  BRICS  in  the  Company  of  Other 

International Organizations 

The  next  important  step  will  be  to  consider  the  formation  of  BRICS,  the 

history  of  its  creation,  as  well  as  its role among other international organizations. 

This  step  is extremely necessary in order to review and analyze the context of the 

block's existence and functioning.  

The BRICS group initially consisted of five members: Brazil, Russia, India, 

China and South Africa. However, it has already become a significant organization 

on  the  world  stage,  reflecting  the  changing  dynamics  of  international  law 

enforcement  agencies.  The  very  concept  of  BRICS  originates in a 2001 report by 

Goldman  Sachs  economist  Jim  O'Neill,  who  identified  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and 

China  (BRIC)  as  fast-growing  economies  ready  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  global 

economy  of  the  21st  century.  It  was  this  analytical  group that laid the foundation 

for  what  later  became  the  official  intergovernmental  organization,  Neill  (2002). 

According to the InfoBRICS resource (2025), it was the Russian side that initiated 

the creation of an informal group of BRIC states. At the suggestion of the President 

of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin, the first informal meeting of the Foreign 

Ministers  of  the  countries  and  also  the  Minister  of  Defense  of  India  took  place 

within  the  framework  of  the  session  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  in 

September 2006 in New York. 

 
21 

And  already  in  June  2009,  the  first  official  BRIC  summit  was  held  in 

Yekaterinburg,  Russia,  at  which  the  leaders  outlined  a  common  vision  for 

expanding  cooperation, according to the official website of the Kremlin (2009). A 

joint  statement  was  adopted,  which  included  the  goals  of  the  BRIC,  as  well  as 

highlighted  the  areas  of  cooperation  and  development  prospects  for  the  group's 

countries,  according  to InfoBRICS (2025). And already in December 2010, South 

Africa  was  invited  to  join  the  group,  which  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  BRICS 

acronym, which is still used today. The inclusion of the new member expanded the 

geographical  representation  of  the  group  in  Africa,  as  well  as  strengthened  its 

position as a representative of the interests of the Global South. 

Since  its  creation,  BRICS  has  gradually  expanded  the  scope  of  its 

cooperation  to  cover  various  sectors,  including  finance,  agriculture,  healthcare, 

science and technology, and cultural exchanges – most important sectors of almost 

all  developed  countries.  Regular  summits  emphasize  the  initiative  of  the 

member-states  to  conduct  and  strengthen  dialogue  between  them  so  that 

cooperation becomes more fruitful and multilateral (most recently one was held in 

Kazan, Russia in 2024). An important achievement was the creation in 2014 of the 

New  Development  Bank  (NDB)  with  headquarters  in  Shanghai,  according  to  the 

resource of the structure – NDB.int (2025). The purpose of this crucial institute for 

the  bloc  is  to  mobilize  resources  for  infrastructure  and  sustainable  development 

projects  in  BRICS  and other emerging market economies. In addition, as reported 

by  BCG  (2024),  the  Conditional  Reserves  Mechanism  (CRA)  was  established  to 

provide  financial  support to member countries facing difficulties in the balance of 

payments.  This,  in  turn,  reflects  collective  efforts  to  strengthen  financial  stability 

regardless of Western-dominated institutions such as the IMF. 

In  recent  years,  the  BRICS  bloc  has significantly expanded its membership 

to include other emerging market economies, reflecting the current dynamics of the 

development of international institutions in international relations. This expansion, 

as well as the potential expansion, is often referred to as "BRICS+". The inclusion 

 
22 

of  new  members  and  the  expansion  of  the  group  will  be  discussed  in  one  of  the 

following subchapters. 

In  the  context  of  the  expansion  and  establishment  of  BRICS  as  a  growing 

association, it can be considered as an attempt by developing countries to create an 

alternative platform for international cooperation. This largely reflects the role and 

functioning  of  the  international  system,  which  already  includes  many  different 

organizations  and  associations.  Cochrane  &  Zaidan  (2024),  for  example,  analyze 

the  economic  and geopolitical consequences of BRICS+. They note the continued 

and  ongoing  dominance  of  the  G7  in  global  finance,  but  at  the  same  time,  the 

economies  of  the  BRICS  member  countries  are  gaining influence in key resource 

sectors  such  as  energy,  commodities,  and  essential  minerals. There are also many 

scientific  papers  and opinions from scholars, and the expansion and strengthening 

of  positions  from  BRICS  leads  to  a  test  of  long-established  unipolarity  and  the 

dominance  of  entrenched  institutions  through  which  large  and  influential  powers 

like  the  United  States  project  their  initiatives  and  pursue  their  own  national 

interests.  According to Papa and Han (2025), it can be stated that the BRICS bloc 

is striving for soft balancing, using economic and financial institutions such as the 

New  Development  Bank  (NDB)  to counterbalance the financial dominance of the 

West. At the same time, it is argued that there is no direct challenge by military or 

coercive means, which indicates caution and pragmatism. 

Finally,  it  is  worth  considering  and  answering  whether  BRICS  is  a 

full-fledged international organization and whether it can be called that on an equal 

basis  with  other  well-established  foundations.  Indeed,  it  is  quite  common  to  see 

how  the  BRICS  group  of  countries  is  called  an  “international  organization.” 

Moreover,  it  is  also  common  to find other descriptions of the association, such as 

“block”,  “group”,  “association".  This  is  also  why  it  is  important  to  make  such  a 

digression  and  try  to  find  an  answer  to  this  question.  BRICS  does  not  have  an 

official  charter  or  a  legally  binding  treaty  similar  to  traditional  international 

organizations  such  as  the  United  Nations  (UN),  for  example.  But  in  BRICS, 

institutional features and structural governance are quite clearly visible. It is fair to 

 
23 

conclude  that  BRICS  does  not  fit  the  traditional  definition  of  an  international 

organization due to its lack of a legal charter, formal governance mechanisms, and 

binding  obligations  between  members.  But  with  all  this,  you  cannot  just  call  it  a 

diplomatic forum, because it goes beyond its scope. Especially taking into account 

institutionalized  financial  structures  (for  example,  NDB,  CRA),  regular  summits 

and coordinated geopolitical positioning. Scholars often describe BRICS as a "soft 

institution" or an "informal international organization" that operates outside a strict 

legal  framework,  but  still  influences  global  governance,  according  to  Konyshev 

and  Sergunin  (2022).  Therefore,  it  should  be  concluded  that  BRICS  is  rather  a 

hybrid  institute  or  association  that  combines  the  features  of  international 

organizations, but it is not one hundred percent of it. 

2.4 The Processes and Stages of BRICS Expansion 

The  next  final  step  in  the  first  chapter  will  be  to  review  the  stages  and 

process  of  the  expansion  of  the  BRICS  bloc  as  a  whole.  This  step  is  extremely 

important  for  understanding  and  further  analysis on the part of the bloc, since the 

motives  and  general  initiatives  for future expansion are clearly traced through the 

stages of an already completed expansion. 

Firstly, it should be noted that since its founding in 2006, at that time, BRIC 

had  evolved  from  a  group  of  leading  emerging  economies  to  a  significant  player 

and  association  on  the  world  stage.  Initially,  BRICS  (at  the  time  before  2010  – 

BRIC) consisted of four countries: Brazil, Russia, India and China. The first stage 

of  the  expansion  of  the  bloc's  member  countries  occurred  in  2010,  when  South 

Africa  joined  the  group,  which  expanded  the  geographical  representation  of  the 

organization  to  the  African  continent.  This  expansion,  in  turn,  brought  with  it  an 

additional  letter in the name of the organization – now BRIC has become BRICS. 

An  official  invitation  to  join  the  South  African  organization  was  received  from 

China,  according  to  InfoBRICS  (2025).  On  December  24,  2010,  South  Africa 

officially  became  a  member  of  the  organization,  after  this  decision was approved 

by  all  participating  countries.  Thus,  according  to  EFSAS  (2023),  BRICS  became 

 
24 

the  first  intercontinental  group  of developing countries to include a representative 

from  Africa.  This  stage,  through  the  accession  of  South  Africa,  marked  only  the 

beginning  of  further serious initiatives of the BRICS bloc. It was their indigenous 

members  –  Brazil,  Russia,  China,  and  South  Africa  –  who  carried  out  and 

implemented major initiatives (for example, the creation of the New Development 

Bank  in  2015),  as  well  as  regular  summits  and  meetings  within  the organization. 

The  first  step  of  the  expansion  contributed  to  strengthening  the  geopolitical 

influence  of  the  bloc  and  strengthening  its  position  as  an  alternative  platform for 

global governance and unification. 

Continuing  the  conversation  about  the  expansion  of  the  participating 

countries and the countries invited to join BRICS, it is most important to focus on 

the  events  and  cycles  of  expansion  in  the  last  3  years.  Since  they  have  become 

perhaps the largest stages at the moment (if we separate these expansion initiatives 

into  one  stage)  of  growth  and  increase  in  participants  and  partners.  Invited 

members  and  countries  that  have  applied  for  membership.  It  all  started  with  the 

fifteenth  BRICS  summit  in  Johannesburg  in  August  2023,  which  became  the 

second  large-scale  stage  of  expansion.  South  African  President  Cyril  Ramaphosa 

announced that six new countries have received invitations to join the organization: 

Argentina,  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  Iran,  Saudi  Arabia  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates, 

according  to  Cochrane  &  Zaidan  (2024).  This  decision  and  decisive  initiative 

demonstrates  the  transition  to  an  active  expansion  of  the  BRICS  group,  aimed  at 

strengthening the global influence of the bloc and further diversifying its members. 

However,  not  all  countries  accepted 

the 

invitation  and 

joined 

the  full 

member-states  accordingly.  Argentina  renounced  membership after the November 

2023  elections,  when  President  Javier  Milei  announced  his  intention  not  to  join, 

according to the Buenos Aires Times (2023). And as stated by El Cronista (2023), 

on November 30, 2023, Argentine Foreign Minister Diana Mondino confirmed this 

step,  and  on  December  29,  the  government  sent  an  official  letter  to  the  BRICS 

leaders  withdrawing  from  the  accession  process.  In  turn,  the  other  invited 

countries, with the exception of Saudi Arabia, accepted the invitations and became 

 
25 

full members of BRICS on January 1, 2024. The increase in participating countries 

from five to nine was made possible by Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran and the United Arab 

Emirates. Speaking about the results of the major expansion of the bloc in 2024, it 

is  worth  saying  that  this  stage  of  expansion  can  be  called  part  of  a  long-term 

strategy  to  strengthen  the position of the Global South, since the expansion of the 

BRICS  bloc  in  2024  took  place  precisely  within  the  Global  South,  according  to 

Anghel & Jones (2024). 

As  mentioned  earlier,  this  scientific  study  itself  is  aimed  at  a  very  specific 

country  –  Saudi  Arabia,  which  at  that  time  (January  2024)  postponed  and  left 

under  consideration  its  accession  to  the  BRICS  bloc,  as  reported  by  Reuters 

(2024).  At  the  time  of  writing  this  academic  paper,  late 2024 and early 2025, the 

Kingdom  is  still  at  the  stage of considering its membership in the bloc. However, 

according to Arab News (2024), Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud himself, the Minister of 

Foreign Affairs of the KSA, joined the sixteenth BRICS summit in Kazan, Russia. 

He  also  expressed  his  willingness  to  cooperate  and  reaffirmed  his  country's 

commitment to further expand its partnership with the BRICS group. That is, at the 

time  of  the  summit  in  Kazan  (October  2024),  Saudi  Arabia  is  not  officially  a 

member  state,  but  is  actively  acting  as  an  invited  country  and  partner-state,  who 

also supports and confirms the desire for further cooperation. 

The  next  initiative  to  expand  its  reach  was  on  October  24,  2024,  when 

BRICS  took  the  next  step  in  development,  and according to CNA (2024), invited 

13  states  to  participate  in  the partnership format: Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, 

Indonesia,  Kazakhstan,  Malaysia,  Nigeria,  Thailand,  Turkey,  Uganda,  Uzbekistan 

and  Vietnam.  These  countries  have  been  granted  the  status  of  "partner  states", 

which  allows  them  to  participate  in  BRICS  initiatives  and  receive  economic 

benefits from cooperation. 

Finally,  at  the  beginning  of  2025,  Indonesia  joined  a  number  of  BRICS 

member-states, which officially became the tenth full member on January 6, 2025. 

It  became  the  first  Southeast  Asian  country  to  join the bloc, according to EFSAS 

(2025). 

 
26 

Summarizing  the  stages  of  the  BRICS  expansion,  it  should  be  said  that, 

judging by the trend and active initiatives on the part of the bloc, this indicates the 

dynamic development of this international body. Since its establishment in 2006, it 

has  gradually  transformed  from  an  informal  economic  club  into  an  important 

geopolitical  platform  and  international  association.  Historically,  the  expansion  of 

BRICS  has  occurred  in  stages:  from  the  first  inclusion  of  South  Africa  in  2010, 

which  consolidated  the  group  as  an  intercontinental  association,  to  a  large-scale 

expansion  in  2023-2025.  New  and  more  modern  stages  of  expansion  mark  the 

inclusion of a number of new countries, as well as the introduction of a partnership 

format that further expands the processes of participation within the BRICS group. 

In general, the expansion of the BRICS confirms that the bloc is gradually turning 

from an informal economic association of four countries into a broad political and 

economic coalition capable of forming alternative global institutions. 

Summing up, some conclusions from the first chapter of this study should be 

noted. As planned, within the framework of the chapter on the theoretical basis and 

understanding  of  BRICS  as  an  international  structure,  an  analysis  of  extremely 

important  aspects  was  carried  out  in  order  to  consider  the  BRICS  bloc  in  the 

broader framework of global governance. In the current dynamics of the new world 

order, the BRICS group (and currently BRICS+ group) is being formed within the 

framework  of  a  multipolar  world  order,  creating  and  following  one  of  the  main 

directions  –  creating  an  alternative  model  to  the  existing  ones,  strengthening 

multipolarity.  Of  course,  it  is  impossible  to  name  the  block  of  countries  that  is 

considered in this study in the traditional definition of an international organization 

because  of  its  informal  nature  and  consensus-based.  But  this  association 

nevertheless plays an important role in shaping global governance and provides an 

alternative  to  Western-dominated  institutions.  Considering  the  theoretical basis of 

IOs  as  such,  two  main  points  of  view  were  chosen  for  analysis:  liberal 

institutionalism,  formulated  by  Keohane  (Keohane,  1984),  emphasizes the role of 

institutions  in  reducing  transaction  costs,  ensuring  compliance  and  strengthening 

interdependence between states; and the opposite approach is a realistic one, where 

 
27 

scholars  such  as  Mearsheimer  (1994)  argue  that  international  organizations 

primarily serve as arenas for great power rivalry, rather than autonomous actors in 

global affairs. In this regard, BRICS is a unique case because it combines elements 

of  both  perspectives:  it  promotes  cooperation  and  economic  interdependence 

among its members, and serves as a platform for emerging powers challenging the 

traditional world order, according to Debre & Dijkstra (2023). 

Additionally,  the  historical  evolution  and  expansion  stages  of  BRICS show 

that this bloc was conceived as an informal economic group, the purpose of which 

was to strengthen cooperation between the largest emerging economies at the time 

of its creation. However, with the time of growth and prosperity of the formation, it 

has  significantly  expanded  its  functionality  and  membership.  Its  very  existence 

today  challenges  the  dominance  of  Western-led  institutions  such  as  the  IMF  and 

the  World  Bank,  as  stated by da Costa & Sattler (2020), as it offers an alternative 

model  of  international  economic  cooperation,  especially  for  the  countries  of  the 

Global  South.  It  is  worth  noting  that  BRICS  occupies  a  unique  position  in  the 

system  of  international  organizations,  even  though  it does not fully correspond to 

the  concept  of  “international  organization"  as  a  whole.  Its  growing  influence  in 

economic  and  geopolitical  affairs  continues  to  strengthen  the  BRICS'  position  in 

the  international  arena,  making  the  association  increasingly  attractive  to  the 

developing economies of the world. This, in turn, is evidenced by the expansion of 

BRICS  over  the  past  three  years,  when  the  group  increased  to  as  many  as  ten 

official member states and expanded its partnerships with a dozen countries.  

It  was  extremely  important  to  consider  all  this  in  the  first  chapter  of  this 

scientific research, even despite the narrower nature of the review by Saudi Arabia, 

which  is  still  considering  an  application  for  full  membership.  Such  an analysis is 

extremely important in order to consider what the bloc can actually become for the 

Kingdom  and  what  prospects  can  be  considered  within  the  framework  of  their 

cooperation.  The  very  nature  of  the BRICS group, its goals and further initiatives 

have a direct impact on the international relations of the KSA. 

 
 
3. Prospects for Saudi Arabia's Cooperation Within the Framework 

28 

of BRICS 

As one of the most influential economies in the Middle East, Saudi Arabia is 

showing a growing interest in expanding cooperation with BRICS, a block that has 

transformed from a loose coalition of emerging market economies into a key forum 

for  global  multipolarity.  And  turning  to  a  direct  analysis  of  Saudi  Arabia's 

prospects  in  the  framework  of  cooperation  with  BRICS,  it  is  worth  starting  with 

the  rather  obvious  and  most necessary things. Of course, we are talking about the 

reasons and drivers that push the Kingdom to work more closely and interact with 

the structures of the bloc, its member-states and partners. Within the framework of 

this  chapter,  the  probable  reasons  that  determine  the  desires  and intentions of the 

KSA for further expansion of contact with BRICS and possible membership in the 

bloc will be considered and analyzed. It is worth noting that Saudi Arabia's interest 

in  BRICS  is  driven  by  a  variety  of  strategic,  economic  and  geopolitical 

considerations, which, for example, is evident through initiatives such as economic 

diversification  under  the  Vision  2030  program.  This  national  plan  aims to reduce 

dependence  on  oil  revenues,  attract  foreign  investment,  and  expand  its  role  in 

global  trade  networks,  including  growth  in  the  Middle  East.  It  can  also  be  noted 

that  the  deepening  of  cooperation  within  the  bloc  gives  Saudi  Arabia  the 

opportunity  to  strengthen  and  diversify  long-term  energy  partnerships,  especially 

with  BRICS  states.  At  the  same  time,  strengthen  their  trade  relations  and 

participate  in  alternative  financial  mechanisms  such  as  the  New  Development 

Bank  (NDB) and de-dollarization initiatives promoted by BRICS members. These 

are  just  some  of  the  few  potential  reasons  for  the  Kingdom's  desire to expand its 

partnerships with the bloc or maybe even to fully join after some time. 

However,  in  addition  to  a  number  of  advantages  and  reasons  for  seeking 

rapprochement, there are a number of structural and geopolitical factors that make 

it  difficult  for  Saudi  Arabia  to  fully  integrate  into  BRICS,  as  well  as  potential 

reasons  why  the  Kingdom  chooses a more balanced approach to interactions with 

 
29 

structures  such  as  the  BRICS  bloc.  First,  we  can  note  the  continuing  close 

relationship  of  the  KSA  with  global  financial  and  security  structures  led  by  the 

West.  For  example,  the  United  States  has  been  the  main  guarantor  of  Saudi 

Arabia's  security  for  decades,  providing  military  support,  advanced  defense 

technology,  and  strategic  security  cooperation.  That  is  why  joining  BRICS  in  a 

more  official  capacity  may  be  perceived  as  a  departure  from  traditional  Western 

alliances,  which  will  cause  concern  in  Washington  and  other  Western  partner 

countries about the long-term geopolitical orientation of Saudi Arabia. Perhaps this 

is a pretty good reason to choose a balanced approach. These and other significant 

obstacles, including the very nature of the Kingdom itself, will be analyzed in this 

chapter. 

And  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  chosen  approach  with  an  analysis  of  the 

beginnings and potential causes, desires and aspirations of the KSA from the point 

of  view  of  both  main  theories  of  international  relations  -  liberalism and realism - 

will  allow  us  to  fully  consider  various  aspects  from  completely  different  angles. 

Moreover,  this  approach  will  make  it  possible  to  try  to  explain  the  reasons  and 

aspirations of Riyadh for rapprochement with the BRICS bloc, but at the same time 

leaving its balanced approach in view of some reasons that hinder full integration. 

3.1 Reasons for the Desire and Intention of the KSA to Join BRICS 

First  of  all, within the framework of an extensive chapter on the analysis of 

prospects  and  obstacles  to  membership  with  its  potential  BRICS  participation,  it 

will be necessary to consider the most likely reasons for the state's desire to expand 

its  presence  and  participation  in  the  group.  Riyadh  considers  participation  in 

various  international  associations,  alliances  and  organizations  very  carefully  and 

with  in-depth  attention.  The  BRICS  group,  and  in  this  case  even  the  BRICS+ 

group,  is  no  exception.  That  is  why  it  is worth paying attention to the analysis of 

the  desire  of  the  KSA  to  expand  its  participation  in  the  affairs  of  BRICS  and  to 

consider  its  full  integration  with  the  group  in  a  positive  way.  Analyzing  the 

prospects  for  the  state  within  the  group  will  allow  for  a  better  understanding  of 

 
30 

motivation  and  true  goals,  as  well  as  help  to  track  exactly  how Saudi Arabia can 

influence the state of international affairs both in the Middle East region and on the 

global  stage.  Of  course,  the  focus  is  on  the  Kingdom's  foreign  policy  and  its 

aspirations in geopolitical affairs in the international and regional arenas. 

3.1.1 Expanding Trade Interactions 

Perhaps  one  of  the  key  and  motivating  factors  for  the  full  integration  of 

Saudi  Arabia  with  the  BRICS  bloc  is  the  potential  for  expanding  trade  relations 

with  the  countries  of  the  group.  And  the  establishment  of  more  favourable 

conditions within the framework of the association can significantly stimulate trade 

relations  and  contribute  to  increasing  the share of exports with fewer losses. As a 

bloc,  BRICS  represents  a  rapidly  growing  segment  of  the  global  economy. 

Moreover, it accounts for a significant part of international trade, investment flows 

and  commodity  exchanges.  And  that  is  why  Saudi  Arabia's  cooperation  with  the 

BRICS  countries  opens  the  way  to  deepening  trade ties with key economies such 

as  China, India, Brazil and Russia, markets that are already among the Kingdom's 

most  important  trading  partners.  And  the  growth  and  strengthening  of  trade 

relations along with trade turnover, in turn, is an advantage for Saudi Arabia. 

For example, at the BRICS+ 2024 summit in Kazan, the Minister of Foreign 

Affairs  of  the  Kingdom  Faisal  bin  Farhan  Al  Saud,  presenting  his  country's 

delegation at the summit, emphasized the growing relations between the KSA and 

the BRICS countries, according to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia 

(2024).  Moreover,  according  to  the  same  source,  the  minister  noted  that  in 2023, 

the  Kingdom's  trade  and  bilateral  trade  with  the  BRICS  countries exceeded $196 

billion,  accounting  for  approximately  37%  of  Saudi  Arabia's  total  foreign  trade 

(“MOFA.GOV.SA,”  2024).  Such  indicators  demonstrate  the  serious  scale  of 

existing interactions between Riyadh and the countries of the bloc. And in addition 

to  this,  it  is  worth  noting  the  significant  share  that  the  Kingdom's  trade  turnover 

and  trade  in  general  the  BRICS  countries  occupies,  which  in  turn  shows  an 

important  aspect  of  trade  decisions  on  the  part  of the KSA. That is why it can be 

 
argued  that  the  already  existing  large-scale  trade  integration  highlights  how 

beneficial further deepening of economic ties through the membership mechanism 

31 

can be. 

Additionally,  trade  and  economic  relations  between  individual  BRICS 

member  countries  and  Saudi  Arabia  are  actively  developing  at the bilateral level. 

For example, in 2024, South Africa and the KSA agreed to increase the volume of 

bilateral  trade  and  investment,  as  reported  by TV BRICS (2024). The importance 

of the growth of mutual trade relations and investment growth was noted. This step 

demonstrates  the  growing  interest  of  the  BRICS  countries  in  developing 

comprehensive  cooperation  with  Saudi  Arabia,  and  vice  versa,  the  KSA  is  also 

fully  interested  in  strengthening  its  position  in  trade  relations  with  BRICS  and 

BRICS+ states. 

Also, the BRICS trade prospects are clearly visible in the joint communique 

of  the  14th  BRICS  Trade  Ministers  Meeting,  which  emphasizes  a  common 

commitment  to  promoting  trade  within  the  BRICS  countries,  according  to  the 

JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE 14TH BRICS TRADE MINISTERS MEETING 

(2024).  This  coaction  is  seen  and  planned  by  expanding  the  cross-border 

movement  of  goods,  promoting  electronic  documentation,  and  countering 

unilateral protectionist measures that act as obstacles to trade flows. And of course, 

these  collective  goals  are  consistent  with  Saudi  Arabia's  ambitions  to  expand  its 

exports  and  reduce  transaction  costs.  And  this  can  be  done  by  simplifying  trade 

procedures, which are discussed in the joint communique of the 2024 by the bloc. 

Of  particular  importance  is  the  commitment  of  BRICS  to  a  WTO-compliant, 

transparent  and  non-discriminatory 

trade  policy,  according 

to 

the  Joint 

Communique  (2024).  This,  in  turn,  further  increases  the  predictability  and 

attractiveness  of  the  bloc  for  Saudi  Arabia's  trade  interests.  Furthermore,  the 

block's  strategic  attractiveness  can  be  traced  through  initiatives  to  expand 

cooperation  in  the  field  of  joint  production  and  distribution  chains  along  with 

special economic zones. This provides for the localization of industrial production 

and the distribution of incentives among the group's members, which could provide 

 
32 

Saudi  Arabia  with  the  opportunity  to  integrate  its  industrial  sectors  into  broader 

regional and global supply chains. Participation in such initiatives may allow Saudi 

firms  and  enterprises  to  gain  access  to  new  production  partnerships  and  logistics 

routes, as well as benefit from simplified regulatory procedures. 

Another  extremely  important  aspect  is  highlighted  in  the  2024  joint 

communique,  which  says  that  the  BRICS  countries  are planning and discussing a 

path  to  digitalization  of  trade  practices,  including  the  use  of  electronic  bills  of 

lading  and  digital  payment  systems.  This,  in  turn,  will  reduce  costs  and  improve 

access  for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) throughout the bloc. Saudi 

Arabia is striving and gradually realizing the growth of digital infrastructure and is 

also  interested  in  investing  in  e-commerce,  in  line  with  the  broader  goals  of 

economic  diversification  within  the  framework  of  Vision  2030,  which signals the 

potential  benefits  of  participating  in  these  innovations,  which  are  actively 

promoted and discussed by the BRICS bloc. 

Generally  speaking,  it  can  be  noted  that  BRICS  trading  platform  provides 

Saudi  Arabia  with many incentives to strengthen and expand its trade relations. If 

it  falls  within  the  institutional  framework  and  system  of  cooperation  of  the  bloc, 

the Kingdom can gain wider access to new markets, as well as strengthen the trade 

turnover of the already extensive integration with the BRICS countries. According 

to the Vision 2030 goals, the KSA seeks to diversify its trade and economy, which 

can be fully realized and improved through closer integration with the bloc. And of 

course, such trade initiatives seek to enhance Riyadh's role as a growing force and 

a key player in global trade. 

3.1.2 Diversification of Investment Partners and Attraction of New FDI 

Continuing  to  analyze  the  reasons  for  Saudi  Arabia's  deep  integration  with 

the BRICS bloc, the next important motivating point may be the diversification of 

investment  partners,  as  well  as  attracting  new  investments  from  the  BRICS 

member-states.  And  here  it  can  be  indisputably  stated  that  such  steps  are  key 

elements  of  the  economic  development  strategy  of  many  states, allowing them to 

 
33 

confidently develop, attract new partners, and strengthen their economic portfolio. 

This  contributes  to  sustainable  growth  and  reduced  dependence  on  traditional 

sectors,  which  Saudi  Arabia  is  actively  engaged  in  as  part  of  the  Vision  2030 

strategy,  which  focuses  on  the  country's  economic  development  and  growth. 

Particular  emphasis  is  placed  on  reducing  the  dependence  of  the  state’s economy 

on  the  oil  industry.  That  is  why  the  diversification  of  investment  partners  is  an 

important  step  for  the  Kingdom  to  secure  and  expand  its  portfolio, and attracting 

new  investments  from  the  actively  developing  countries  of  the  BRICS  bloc  will 

bring the necessary economic push and momentum for the internal development of 

economic sectors in the KSA. 

BRICS  membership  provides  a  unique  platform  to  strengthen  investment 

relationships  with  some  of  the  fastest-growing  economies  in  the  Global  South. 

Countries such as China, India and Brazil are actively expanding their presence in 

the  international  investment  market.  That  is  why  BRICS  is  interested  in  creating 

favourable conditions for long-term investment flows. The importance of the block 

for  investment  diversification  was  highlighted  at  the  Annual  Investment  Meeting 

2024  (AIM)  held  in  Abu  Dhabi,  according  to  the  official  resources  of  the  AIM 

Congress and the news agency TV BRICS (2024). During the event, the president 

of  the  Global  Fund,  AIM  Dawood  Al  Shezawi,  noted  the  opportunities  of  the 

BRICS countries as new markets for Arab economies. He noted that Saudi Arabia, 

the United Arab Emirates, and Egypt, as one of the key partners of the BRICS bloc 

(Egypt  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates  are  full-fledged  members  of  the  group), 

together account for 66% of the GDP of the Arab world. According to Dawood Al 

Shezawi,  BRICS markets such as Brazil, Russia, China, and South Africa provide 

"new  opportunities  for  growth  and  investment,"  according  to  TV  BRICS  (2024). 

For Saudi Arabia, this can indeed be noted as a potential advantage and a desire for 

further  integration  with  the  bloc,  making  it  possible  and  more reliable to develop 

investment opportunities in emerging economies and attract FDI.  

In  addition,  Saudi  Arabia  is  already  in  the  process  of  developing  and 

expanding  its  investment  geography,  especially  with  the  fundamental  BRICS 

 
34 

members.  Currently,  the  kingdom  is  the  largest  investor  in  the  renewable  energy 

sector  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  (RSA),  and,  as  reported  by  TV  BRICS 

(2024), the total volume of Saudi investments in South Africa is estimated at 1.62 

billion  US  dollars.  This,  in  turn,  indicates  the  desire  of  the  KSA  to  strengthen 

economic ties with partners within the framework of cooperation with BRICS and 

diversify  its  investment  portfolios.   Such  investments  clearly  contribute  to  the 

development  of  South  Africa's  energy infrastructure but at the same time open up 

new  markets,  economic  and  trade  partnerships  for  Saudi  companies  and  the 

country as a whole. Of course, such actions fall within the sphere of interests of the 

Kingdom and contribute to strengthening its position in the international arena.  

It  turns  out  that  BRICS  can  really  offer  good  and  confident  investment 

prospects  for  Saudi  Arabia.  These  investment  ties  and  advantages  enhance  the 

attractiveness  of  BRICS  membership  as a tool to enhance the Kingdom's regional 

and global economic integration and diversification, which it pursues as part of its 

extensive  Vision  2030  plan.  And  this,  in  turn,  will  help  Saudi  Arabia  to  develop 

more  confidently  and  take  a  leading  position  in  the  region  by  strengthening  and 

diversifying its economy. 

3.1.3 De-dollarization and Alternative Financial Mechanisms 

An  equally  important  aspect  for  the  analysis  is  the  issue  of  trends  in 

de-dollarization  on  the  part  of  BRICS.  The  US  dollar  has  historically  occupied  a 

dominant  position  in  the  international  financial  system.  And it is indisputably the 

main currency for most global transactions and reserves. For example, according to 

the  International  Monetary Fund (IMF) (2025) and as reported by Reuters (2025), 

in  the  last  quarter  of  2024,  the  dollar's  share  in  global  foreign  exchange  reserves 

was  57.8%.  According  to  the  latest  survey  by  the  Bank  for  International 

Settlements (BIS), the dollar accounted for about 88% of international transactions 

and  trade  in  general.  And  of  course,  the  influence  and  share  of  the dollar remain 

extremely  significant.  With  great confidence, we can note the continued influence 

of  this  currency  on  global  finance  and  the  global  economy.  However,  in  recent 

 
35 

years,  there  has  been  a  trend  towards  de-dollarization,  a  process  of  reducing 

dependence  on  the  US  dollar  in  international  trade  and  finance.  This  process 

accelerated  especially  after  geopolitical  events  such  as  the  conflict  in  Ukraine  in 

2022,  when  about  $300  billion  of  Russian  reserves  were  frozen  due  to  sanctions 

and other restrictions, as reported by Reuters (2022), which in particular prompted 

Russia  to  look  for  alternatives.  And  the  asset  situation  itself  has  to  some  extent 

prompted  countries  to  look  for  alternative  financial  mechanisms,  including 

currency, to protect their economies from external (and even geopolitical) risks.  In 

this  context,  it  will  be  extremely  important  to  consider  the  advantage  that  the 

BRICS group can provide to Saudi Arabia, which is striving for a high-quality and 

correct diversification of risks and the economic model as a whole. 

The  BRICS  countries  are  actively  exploring  and  discussing  ways to reduce 

dependence  on  the  dollar,  considering  the  creation  of  new  financial  instruments 

and  the  use  of  national  currencies  in  bilateral  and  multilateral  trade.  Such 

initiatives  were  discussed  during  the  BRICS  summit  in  Kazan  in  2024.  For 

example,  as  Russian  Presidential  Aide  for  Foreign  Policy  Yuri  Ushakov  noted  in 

his  interview  with  TASS  (2024),  he  highlighted  the  importance  of  the  group's 

economic and financial initiatives, as well as strengthening strategic partnerships in 

trade,  investment,  and  technology.  As  a  moment  for  creating  conditions  for 

sustainable  economic  growth,  as  well  as  expanding  business  ties  and  financial 

stability,  the  issue  of  creating  a  mechanism  for  conditional  reserves  and  an 

independent  payment  system  was  raised,  as  Yuri  Ushakov reports in an interview 

(2024). This, in turn, makes it clear about the priorities and objectives of BRICS as 

an  association  and  the  desire  to  enhance  the  role  of  the  BRICS  countries  in  the 

international monetary and financial system. 

It  is  also  important  to  evaluate  such  initiatives  and  their  nature  from  the 

perspective  of  Saudi  Arabia,  as  the  subject  of  this  research.  The  situation  in  the 

Middle  East  is  very  similar  to  the  global  trend  of  declining  dollar  dominance, 

which is observed in the region. This can be traced through specific statements and 

initiatives  from  the  states  of  the  region;  for  example,  in  January  2023,  Saudi 

 
36 

Finance  Minister  Mohammed  Al-Jadaan  said  that  the  kingdom  was  open  to 

discussing  trade  in  currencies  other  than  the  US  dollar,  according  to  Bloomberg 

(2023).  This  demonstrates  the  Kingdom's  desire  and  commitment  to  diversify  its 

currency  risks,  as  well  as  its  desire  to  strengthen economic ties with key partners 

(including  among  the  BRICS  member-states).  China  is  one  of  these  partners.  In 

November  2023,  Saudi  Arabia signed a currency swap agreement with him in the 

amount  of  50  billion  yuan  (about  7  billion  US  dollars),  according  to  Bloomberg 

(2023).  And  of  course, this is an indicator and an example of following the stated 

initiatives on the part of Saudi Arabia.  

If  we  consider  this  from  the  point  of  view  of  realism, then we can say that 

such  steps  are  aimed  at  ensuring  economic  security  and  reducing  vulnerability to 

external  financial  and  geopolitical  pressures.  BRICS,  as  one  of  the  active  actors 

among  whose  members  there  are  adherents,  is  developing  and  discussing 

opportunities to create and strengthen alternative financial mechanisms. And if we 

look  at  the  situation  from  the  point  of  view  of  liberalism,  the  use  of  national 

currencies  in  trade  contributes  to  strengthening  cooperation  with major economic 

partners (such as the BRICS+ states) and the development of multilateral relations. 

In  this  context,  Saudi  Arabia  is  demonstrating  its  readiness  to  make  more  active 

use  of  alternative  financial  mechanisms,  which  can  be  achieved,  among  other 

things, through in-depth partnership with BRICS.  

Of course, in the current realities, it is too early to talk about the full-fledged 

creation  of  an  alternative  BRICS  currency.  Although  there  is  a  large  number  of 

arguments and opinions about this, for example, Dmitry Peskov, the press secretary 

of  the  President  of  the  Russian  Federation,  reports  on  specific facts, according to 

RIA  NOVOSTI  (2025),  that  So  far, the creation of a single currency of the group 

has  not  been  discussed  in  the  association.  Nevertheless,  BRICS  single  currency 

should  be  considered  only  as  a  separate  instrument  serving  as  an  addition  to  the 

national  currencies  of  the  bloc  countries.  This  currency,  even  if  it  is  created,  is 

more  likely  to  be  used  for  internal  payments.  Therefore,  this  sub-chapter  mostly 

 
37 

focuses  on  discussing  the  group's  initiatives  regarding  alternative  financial 

mechanisms, which in turn are an attractive prospect for Saudi Arabia. 

3.1.4  Balancing  the  Relations  Between  East  and  West.  Geopolitical 

Considerations 

Undoubtedly,  an  important  aspect  can  be  highlighted  as  the  next  step  in 

considering the potential causes and interests of Saudi Arabia in the BRICS group - 

the  strategy  of  balancing  relations  between  the  West  and  the East. The West here 

refers  to  the  Kingdom's traditional ally and partner, the United States of America. 

Historically,  it  was  the  United  States  that  actively  pursued  its  interests  in  the 

Middle East, since the second half of the 20th century, to be more precise, and the 

KSA serves as a kind of “bridge” between the largest and strongest Western power 

and the region of the Middle East. The USA spends significant amounts of federal 

budget  money  annually  to  maintain  and  invest  in  the  region,  as evidenced by the 

SIPRI (2025) databases on military spending. However, Saudi Arabia has recently 

been  actively  diversifying  its  foreign  policy  and  strategy.  And  one  of  such 

important  steps  and  potential  initiatives  was  to  consider  the  possibility  of joining 

the  BRICS  bloc  and  continuing  deeper  integration  with  it.  This  interstate 

association  positions  itself  as  an  alternative  to  Western  institutions  and  Western 

influence  in  general,  which  may  be  interesting  for  the  Kingdom's  balancing 

strategy.  Undoubtedly,  this  process  of  integration  is  accompanied  by  internal 

discussions and external contradictions, which highlights the difficulty of choosing 

Riyadh between traditional allies and new partners. However, the main motives of 

Saudi Arabia are precisely related to the search for a balance in relations with East 

and  West  instead  of  the  traditional emphasis on Western allies to a greater extent. 

The  search  for  balance  is  also  closely  linked  to  geopolitical  ambitions  and 

considerations  aimed  at  strengthening  the  country's  global  influence  in  the 

international arena and in the Middle East region. 

As  already  mentioned,  Saudi  Arabia  and  the  United  States  maintain  a 

long-term  strategic  partnership.  These  interactions  and  relations  are  based  on 

 
38 

common  interests  in  ensuring  the  stability  and  security  of  the  Middle  East. 

According  to  the  U.S.  Department  of  State  (2025),  Saudi  Arabia  has  been  a  key 

ally in the fight against terrorism, participating in the Global Coalition against ISIS 

(the organization is banned in Russia) since 2014. Moreover, the Kingdom actively 

uses  the  help  of  its  ally  through  training  by  American  experts  in  military  and 

near-military  affairs  in  order  to  actively  participate  in  regional  conflicts.  Also, 

according  to  the  U.S.  Department  of  State  (2025),  contracts  worth  about  $126.6 

billion  were  signed  by  the  United  States  of  America  within the framework of the 

Foreign  Military  Sales  (FMS)  system,  and  since  2017,  agreements  on  the 

modernization  of  the  KSA  armed  forces  have accounted for $110 billion. All this 

testifies to serious and strong ties with the United States, as the largest and one of 

the  main  partners  of  Saudi  Arabia  from  the  West.  This  is  reflected  in  ensuring 

security in the region, as well as the defence capability of the Kingdom itself. 

But the strong and trusting relationship between the partners continued until 

a series of drone attacks on Saudi Arabia's oil infrastructure in 2019, as well as two 

incidents  involving  oil  tankers  in  the  Gulf  of  Oman.  According  to  news  sources 

such  as  the  New  York  Times  (2019),  the  attack  on  Aramco oil facilities began in 

September  2019,  and  oil  tankers  were  attacked  in  May-June  2019.  The 

Abqaiq–Khurais  attack  (also  known  as  the  attack  on  the  KSA  oil  infrastructure) 

caused  a  temporary  reduction  in  oil  production  in  Saudi  Arabia  by  almost  50%. 

Moreover,  these  events  have  significantly  increased  regional  tensions  and 

provoked  a  serious reaction from Riyadh. In turn, there was a reassessment of the 

KSA's  relationship  with  the  United  States  after  these  events,  as  Washington's 

reaction was perceived as insufficient. That is why Saudi Arabia began to actively 

seek alternative security mechanisms and differentiate its alliances, which included 

rapprochement with Russia and China. This, for example, began to be seen in later 

events, such as Saudi Arabia's solidarity with Russia during the crisis that began in 

2022,  when  the  kingdom  led  OPEC+'s  decision  to  cut  oil  production, as reported 

by  Reuters  (2023).  Relations  between  the  United  States  and  Saudi  Arabia 

deteriorated  significantly  after  that.  Nevertheless,  it  can  be  stated  that  since then, 

 
39 

the Kingdom has been pursuing the goal of differentiating its alliances and finding 

a  balance  between  East  and  West.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  significant 

rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and China. December 2022 was an important 

step  towards  developing  and  strengthening  relations  with  China.  This  year,  a 

multilateral  summit  was  held  between  the  two  countries  when  Xi  Jinping  visited 

the  Kingdom,  as  reported  by  Al  Jazeera  (2022).  At  this  meeting,  the  countries 

officially  signed  the  Comprehensive  Strategic  Partnership  agreement.  This 

rapprochement  once  again  demonstrates  Saudi  Arabia's  tendency  to  diffuse  risks 

and also demonstrates its commitment to growth as a geopolitical actor capable of 

skilfully finding a balance and not depending on one partner completely. 

As  for  the  advantages  of  the  Kingdom's  integration  with  BRICS  in  the 

framework  of  balancing  between  traditionally  Western  allies  and  the  East,  two 

global  benefits  can  be  stated:  risk  mitigation  and  the  desire  for  geopolitical 

leadership. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  risk  differentiation,  we  can  recall what was said 

earlier  about  cooperation  with  diametrically  different  countries  and  partners  in 

order to avoid unilateral dependence on the United States. Also, initiatives such as 

integration with BRICS can help in terms of protection from an instrument of force 

such  as  sanctions.  The BRICS group, as discussed earlier in this study, is actively 

discussing  the  transition  to  settlements  in  national  currencies  and  is  also 

considering  reducing  dependence  on  the  dollar  and,  accordingly,  risks  that  are 

directly related to Western financial constraints. Here it can be easily remembered 

about the freezing of 300 billion Russian assets by Western countries can largely be 

called an example and a “signal” to other states regarding such a possible outcome 

if  national  interests  and  strategies  for  geopolitical  reasons  negatively  meet  the 

dominant Western countries. 

As  for  Saudi  Arabia's  geopolitical  interests,  it  can  be  stated  that  joining 

BRICS would strengthen Riyadh's role as a regional leader and global player. It is 

fair  to  say  this  because  the  BRICS  group  positions  itself  as  an  engine  of  a 

multipolar order. As Russian President Vladimir Putin noted, BRICS advocates the 

 
40 

formation  of  a  new  architecture  of  the  world  order,  which  corresponds  to  the 

interests of Saudi Arabia, which seeks to avoid unilateral domination by the West. 

This  was  stated  by  Russian  President  Vladimir  Putin  in  his  press  conference 

following  the  16th  BRICS  summit,  according  to  an official government resource. 

Kremlin.ru  (2024),  he  also  noted  that  the  Kazan  Declaration  was  adopted  at  the 

summit,  which  “reaffirms  the  commitment  of  all  BRICS  countries  to  building  a 

more democratic, inclusive, and multipolar world order based on international law 

and the UN Charter.” In other words, the BRICS bloc can serve as a tool for Saudi 

Arabia to achieve its goals. 

Continuing  the  analysis  of  geopolitical  interests,  Saudi  Arabia's  entry  or 

further  integration  with  BRICS  would  mean  a  shift  from  its  previous  orientation 

towards  a  traditional  ally  and  partner,  the  United  States,  to  the  position  of  an 

independent  regional  power.  It  is  likely  that  this  could  also  serve  as  a  reason  to 

become  the  de  facto  leader  of  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Council and the Arab world. 

BRICS  can  also  contribute  to  this  by  being  a  multilateral  platform  for  further 

cooperation  and  dialogue  with  the  KSA's  geopolitical  rival,  Iran.  And  although 

relations  between  the  two  countries  improved  in  2023,  compared  with  their 

previous  enmity,  tension  and  the  struggle  for  leadership  in  the  region  are  still 

taking  place.  Therefore,  BRICS  can  once  again play a significant role in building 

and  continuing  a  dialogue  with  Iran  within  the  framework  of  diplomacy,  rather 

than using hard power and proxy conflicts in the region. 

Indeed,  in  conclusion,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  the  reasons  motivating 

Saudi Arabia to consider joining BRICS are weighty. The departure from the dense 

unilateral  dependence  on  the  United  States  testifies  to  the  Kingdom's  desire  to 

differentiate its partner ties. Riyadh is striving to balance between the West and the 

East  in  order  to  grow in geopolitical terms. And integration with BRICS makes it 

more  convenient  and  possible  to  pursue  their  interests  by  using  the  group's  tools 

and  commitment  to  similar  goals  to  the  KSA.  Moreover,  it  is  precisely  the 

possibility of a group system of relations within the framework of BRICS that can 

become  a  field for Saudi Arabia to conclude bilateral and multilateral contacts, as 

 
well  as  participate  in  group  initiatives  that  may  largely  meet  the  interests  of  the 

41 

Kingdom. 

3.2  Reasons  and  Factors  Preventing  Full  Integration and Full-Fledged Entry 

into BRICS 

It  can  be  safely  said  that  Saudi  Arabia's  full-fledged  entry  into  the  BRICS 

structure  is  a  decision  that,  in  addition  to  its  advantages,  has  some  controversial 

issues  for  the  country.  Namely,  the  factors  and  reasons  that  hinder  to  full 

integration  at  the  moment.  Of  course,  there  are  clear  advantages,  which  were 

discussed in the previous sub-chapter, however, the country may also face a set of 

structural,  institutional  and  strategic  constraints  related  to  the  consequences  of 

joining  or  the  factors  that  hinder  this  process.  These  obstacles  reflect  the  deep 

dilemma  of  the Kingdom, which seeks to balance between maintaining traditional 

alliances with the West and exploring new opportunities within a multipolar world 

order.  The  purpose  of  this  sub-chapter  is  to  focus  on  analyzing  the  key  factors 

slowing down and hindering the process of Saudi Arabia's full-fledged accession to 

BRICS.  This is due to a number of important and weighty arguments. First, it can 

still  be  argued  that  strong  ties  in  terms  of  security with the United States remain, 

including military-technical cooperation and joint operations, which in turn creates 

risks  of  strategic  alienation  for  both  Washington  and  other  Western  allies  in  the 

event  of  deeper  integration  with  BRICS.  Secondly,  it  is  important  to  take  into 

account  the  heterogeneity  of  interests  within  the  bloc, where competing positions 

of  its  key  members  collide  on  issues such as energy, trade and important regional 

conflicts. This indicates the limited consensus of the group and possible difficulties 

in  its  further  functioning.  Thirdly,  the  presence  of  Saudi  Arabia's  financial 

dependence  on  Western  institutions  and  financial  mechanisms  may  also  indicate 

difficulties in integrating with the BRICS bloc, which, in contrast to the dominance 

of  Western  institutions,  seeks  to  reduce  dollar dependence and separate economic 

interactions. In addition, it is also worth mentioning the limitations and dependence 

of the BRICS countries on Western financial mechanisms, which also complicates 

 
42 

and  makes  the  process  of  separation  complex  and  multifaceted.  Fourth,  it  should 

not be forgotten about the energy policy of BRICS and its member countries (and, 

of  course,  its  partners),  which  may  differ  significantly  from  the  policy  of  Saudi 

Arabia, who is still dependent on oil revenues. The KSA has its own vision in this 

regard,  therefore,  some  initiatives  on  the  part  of  BRICS  may  run  counter  to  the 

Kingdom's plan. 

3.2.1  Strong  Security  Ties with the United States. Risk of Alienating Western 

Allies 

Perhaps  one  of  the  key  reasons  why  Saudi  Arabia  is  still  at  the  stage  of 

considering  its  full-fledged  participation  in  the  BRICS  bloc  as  a  member,  rather 

than  a  partner,  is  its  strong  connection  with  the United States. And of course, the 

first  thing  worth  mentioning  here  is  the  direct  dependence  of  foreign  policy, 

especially  in  the  field  of  ensuring  its  own  security.  The  Kingdom,  with  all  its 

desire, still has to put up with the fact that the country needs military support from 

the  West.  In  the  previous  sub-chapter,  we  have  already  considered  the  desire  to 

differentiate the Kingdom’s strategic ties and partnerships, as well as moving away 

from unilateral dependence on a traditional partner in the region, and this is indeed 

the case. However, one should take into account the fact that at the moment Saudi 

Arabia cannot simply withdraw from US military support instantly, without having 

serious  damage or consequences for itself. Here we are talking about a strong and 

long-lasting  security  relationship  with  the  United  States,  which  stretches  back  to 

the  20th  century,  when  America  began  to  act  as  a  guarantor  of  security  in  the 

Middle East region, and most of the Persian Gulf countries pegged their currencies 

to the US dollar. Close cooperation with the United States began in 1933, when the 

Kingdom began oil production, as indicated by documents on the official resource 

history.state.gov  (2025),  it  was  then  that  trade,  commercial and other cooperation 

between countries was established through treaties. Since then, both countries have 

been  in  the  process  of  maintaining  basic  cooperation,  including  in  the  field  of 

security.  And  as  already  analyzed  earlier  in  the  sub-chapter  about “Balancing the 

 
43 

Relations Between East and West. Geopolitical Considerations”, we can safely say 

that  Saudi  Arabia  acts  as  the  largest  foreign  buyer  of  various  military  products 

from  the  United  States.  This,  in  turn,  testifies  to  the  crucial  role  of  the  United 

States  in  the  Kingdom's  military  sphere.  This  is  extremely  important  for 

understanding  and  moving  on  to  analyzing  the  hindering  reasons  for  the  full 

integration  of  the  KSA  into  BRICS,  because  an  equally  important  aspect  of  this 

bloc is its own positioning of itself as an actor striving for multipolarity, as well as 

opposing  the  dominant  position  of  the  West.  Therefore,  Saudi  Arabia's  entry into 

BRICS  may  be  regarded  by  Western  allies  as  a  step  against  them,  which  will 

directly  affect  their  relations  and agreements (including in the field of security on 

the part of the United States). 

Turning to a more detailed analysis of these reasons, it is necessary to return 

to  the  historical  events  in  which  Saudi  Arabia  and  the  United States collaborated 

closely in the field of security. For example, we note again that the Kingdom is one 

of  the  main  users  and  buyers  of  US  military  products,  which  helps  Saudi  Arabia 

defend  its  sovereignty,  ensure  territorial  integrity,  and  pursue  its  geopolitical 

interests  within  the  Middle  East  region  (for  example,  through  proxy  conflicts). 

Moreover,  according  to  the  U.S.  Department of State (2025), countries within the 

framework  of  the  Foreign  Military  Sales (FMS) system from the United States of 

America  have  concluded  contracts  worth  about  126.6 billion dollars, which again 

demonstrates  the  close  cooperation  and  continued  dependence  of  the  KSA  in  the 

field  of  security  from  the  United  States.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  the  major 

agreement between the countries in 2017, which included the modernization of the 

KSA  armed  forces  and  the  estimated  military  spending  of  110  billion  dollars, 

according  to  the  U.S.  Department  of State (2025). Moreover, according to Forbes 

(2017), Trump agreed during his visit to the KSA that Saudi Arabia would allocate 

$20  billion  to  the  Blackstone infrastructure fund, which would primarily invest in 

American infrastructure. Such actions and initiatives lead to the conclusion that the 

countries  had  extremely  close  cooperation  with  each  other,  and  Saudi  Arabia's 

dependence  on  military  support  grew  and  strengthened.  Once  again,  it  can  be 

 
44 

stated that the KSA has historically considered cooperation with the United States 

as the cornerstone of its foreign policy, especially in the field of security. But at the 

same  time,  such  a  partnership  creates  significant  obstacles  to  the  kingdom's 

full-fledged  entry 

into  BRICS,  which  can  have 

important  and 

tangible 

consequences for the Kingdom. 

Of  course,  such  a  strong  bond  weakened  to  some  extent  after  the  2019 

attacks  on  oil  facilities  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  the  limited  US  response  to  this  (this 

was  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Balancing  the  Relations  Between  East  and West. 

Geopolitical  Considerations”),  which  prompted  Saudi  Arabia  to  reconsider 

unilateral  dependence  and  seek  differentiation  in  the  field of partnerships. This is 

evidenced  by the rapprochement with China and solidarity with Russia in 2022 as 

part  of  the  reduction  in  oil  production.  This  was  also  accompanied  by  pressure 

from  the  United  States  on  Saudi  Arabia  as  part  of  the  2019  ban  on  the  sale  of 

precision-guided  munitions  to  the  KSA  and  the UAE amid a deteriorating human 

rights  situation  in  these  countries,  as  reported  by  Reuters  (2019).  However,  even 

taking  into  account  such  actions  and  initiatives  to  move  away  from  a  strong 

dependence  on  a  single  partnership  with  the  United  States,  Saudi  Arabia  still 

remains the main “bridge” to the Middle East for the West and remains dependent 

in  the  field  of  security.  For  example,  the  2023  war  in  Gaza  demonstrated  the 

Kingdom's  cautious  approach  to  resolving  the  crisis,  as  it  was  more  inclined  to 

build  a  dialogue,  including  actively  communicating  with  the  United  States  and 

other European countries. There was even news that Saudi Arabia refused to fulfil 

a  defence  agreement  with  the  United  States  due  to  the  controversial  situation 

around  Israel,  according  to  Reuters  (2024),  which  in  turn  did  not  allow  for  a 

full-fledged  military  pact  with  a  Western  partner.  But  at  the  same  time,  the  KSA 

preferred a more modest act on the US military pact, as well as a cooperation pact 

that  allowed  for  the  expansion  of  joint  military  exercises,  according  to  the  same 

source. This, in turn, indicates a more sovereign approach by the Kingdom (which 

was discussed as the country's new path in the previous sub-chapter), however, the 

fact  that  Riyadh  is  still  ready  and  willing  to  receive  military  supplies  and  other 

 
45 

military  advantages  (such  as  joint  exercises)  from  the United States demonstrates 

the  very  existing  dependence  and  continuing  strong  bond  in  the  field.  their  own 

safety.  And  this,  in  turn,  is  one  of  the  most  important  reasons  why  the  KSA  is 

cautiously  approaching  the  possibility  of  the  country's  full-fledged  entry  into 

BRICS. After all, such a step would serve as a serious signal to Washington. 

The  risk  of  alienation  of  Western  partners  from  Saudi  Arabia  after  joining 

BRICS may be increased by the fact that the group positions itself as a supporter of 

multipolarity  and  opposes  the  established  hegemony  of  the  West.  This  fact  has 

already  been  confirmed  in  the  framework  of  this  study,  when  Russian  President 

Vladimir Putin noted during the BRICS summit in Kazan that the bloc supports the 

formation  of  a  new  architecture  of  the  world  order,  according  to  an  official 

government  resource  –  Kremlin.ru  (2024).  Moreover,  in  this  regard,  many 

non-Western  countries  may  perceive  BRICS  as  some  kind  of  platform  where  a 

different  and  alternative  agenda  from  the  dominant  West  is  broadcast.  It  can  be 

argued  that  such  countries  want  to  be heard and contribute to international affairs 

on  the  world  stage,  forming  new  rules  of  the  game  that  would  be  acceptable  to 

themselves.  Muktar  Kedir,  the  Ethiopian  Ambassador  to  South  Africa,  warns 

against  this  idea.  According  to  TASS  (2023),  according  to  the  Ambassador, 

Ethiopia's participation in BRICS is aimed at strengthening and establishing a more 

inclusive and equitable global system, which is achieved by deepening cooperation 

within  the  global  South.  He  also  noted  the  benefits  of such initiatives in terms of 

strengthening the sovereignty of such states. These facts may indicate that there is 

some  general  commitment  by  the  new  member  countries  and  partners  of  the 

BRICS group to redefine the status quo on the world stage. China and Russia, one 

of the main BRICS countries, are in fact the largest rivals of the United States and 

are  experiencing  some  geopolitical  tensions,  and  newly  minted  members  of  the 

association,  such as Iran, complement this thesis of rivalry and confrontation with 

Western hegemony. 

As for Saudi Arabia in this case, in fact, we can say that the state is not such 

an  ardent  and  unequivocal  opponent  of  Western  hegemony.  Of  course,  the 

 
46 

Kingdom  pursues  its  own  geopolitical  interests,  which  can  be  achieved  through 

close  cooperation  with  BRICS.  But  at  the  same  time,  Riyadh  is  carefully  and 

carefully  building  its  foreign  policy  agenda,  especially  against  the  background of 

escalating geopolitical tensions between the United States, China and Russia. Once 

again,  it  can  be  said  that  there  is  an  interest  in  finding  a  balanced  approach  that 

would  not  allow  the  KSA  to  rush  to  extremes  and  alienate  Western  allies  from 

itself.  As  already  discussed  earlier,  the  steps  towards  rapprochement  with  China 

and  Russia  have  largely  caused  concern  in  Washington,  which  is  the  reason  why 

Saudi Arabia's full integration into BRICS is hindering. 

In conclusion, Saudi Arabia's strong security ties with the United States and 

the  risk  of  alienating  Western  allies  are  among  the  key  factors  holding  back  the 

Kingdom's  full  integration  into  BRICS.  The  existing  dependence  in  terms  of 

weapons does not allow us to fully take drastic steps. It is fair to say that Riyadh is 

striving  for  a  cautious  and  balanced  approach  in  order  to  maintain  strategic 

relations  with  the  West,  while exploring opportunities to expand cooperation with 

other global players to achieve its own interests. 

3.2.2 Conflict of Interest Between BRICS Members 

The next extremely important aspect that may and probably is the reason for 

the  obstacle  on  Saudi  Arabia's  path  to  full  integration  with  BRICS  is  its 

heterogeneity.  Heterogeneity  in  this  case  means  that  the  group  is  heterogeneous, 

where  there  is  a  high  probability  of  conflicts  of  interest.  The  BRICS  member 

countries  and  its  partners  may  clash  in  terms  of  geopolitical  and  economic 

interests.  And  this  is  not  surprising,  because  each  individual  member  of  the 

association  strives  and  pursues  its  own  national  interests  in  one  way  or  another, 

including  through  participation in the bloc. Saudi Arabia is no exception. In order 

to  achieve  its  own  goals,  the  Kingdom  may  create  barriers  that  appear  through  a 

complicated process of forming a coherent policy and agenda in the bloc. This may 

act as an obstacle for Saudi Arabia itself, since instability within BRICS or serious 

contradictions  are  more  likely  to  make  it  difficult  to  develop  own  policies  and 

 
47 

pursue  own  goals  through  the  bloc.  It  can  be  fairly  stated  that  Riyadh  is  not 

interested  in  being involved in other state’s conflicts and contradictions, receiving 

negative  effects and consequences from this primarily for itself, violating the plan 

for sustainable development. 

Perhaps  one  of  the  most  striking  examples  of  the  divergence  of  interests 

within  BRICS  is  China  and  India.  Both  countries  are  the  founders  of  unification 

and occupy crucial roles in shaping policy, strategy and agenda. Both countries are 

large  developing  economies  with  large  populations,  and  both  countries  naturally 

pursue  their  own  interests, which to some extent may overlap and contradict each 

other's  interests.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  Sino-Indian  conflict  in  the  Himalayas, 

when  border clashes in the Galwan Valley in 2020, as well as ongoing tensions in 

the  Ladakh  region,  remained  the  cause  and  source  of  tension  between  the 

countries.  India  accused  China of violating the status quo and escalating tensions, 

according  to  The  Guardian  (2020),  and  China  in  turn  accused  India  of escalating 

tensions  along  the  land  borders.  And  despite  the  absence  of  direct  military  and 

major  conflict  between  the  countries,  similar  tensions  between  these  BRICS 

members  have  been  going  on  for  some  time,  as  exemplified  by  the  meeting 

between  Indian  Defense  Minister  Rajnath  Singh and Chinese State Councilor and 

Minister  of  National  Defense  General  Li  Shangfu, where "frank talks" were held, 

according  to  a  press  release  from  the  Ministry  of  Defense  of  India  (2023). 

Moreover, it is worth noting the discrepancies in interests within the framework of 

obtaining  financial  support  from  the  NDB.  India,  for  example,  may  insist  on 

prioritizing  projects  in  South Asia that would be beneficial and appropriate for its 

strategy, while China may be more interested in initiatives within the framework of 

the  national  Belt  and  Road  Strategy  that  may  diverge  from  India's  interests.  This 

indicates  the  ongoing  nature  of  the  contradictions between China and India. Such 

precedents  and  contradictions  between  BRICS  members  clearly  undermine  trust 

within the group and do not allow us to fully take important joint steps as a whole 

when there are similar disagreements within. 

 
48 

It  will  also  be  important  to  mention  here  the  existing  competition  between 

BRICS  members,  as  well  as  potential  competition  with  possible  members  or 

partners  of  the  group. This may directly affect individual countries, such as Saudi 

Arabia,  in  the  case  of  this  study,  because  regional  rivalry  is  an  obstacle  to 

achieving geopolitical goals. Brazil and Venezuela are examples of competition for 

influence within the framework of BRICS. According to Folha de S.Paulo (2024), 

Brazil unofficially imposed its ban, that is, used its veto, on accepting Caracas as a 

partner country in BRICS. This can be viewed from the point of view of a conflict 

of interests between countries, especially regionally – both countries are located on 

the  continent  of  South  America  and  are  forced  to  interact  with  each  other  in one 

way  or  another.  Such  an  action  by  Brazil  demonstrates  the  heterogeneity  of  the 

political  environment  in  the  bloc  and  its  partners,  whose interests may diverge or 

overlap  in  some  areas.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the geopolitical rivalry between 

India and China. 

As  for  Saudi  Arabia,  it  is  worth  remembering  its  historical  tension  in 

relations  with  Iran.  Iran  is  a  full-fledged  member  of  BRICS.  And  yes,  these  two 

historical regional rivals restored their diplomatic relations in 2023, but it can still 

be  argued  that  the  parties  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  before  the dialogue is fully 

normalized. Moreover, these two countries are still the largest actors in the Middle 

East  region,  where  they  both  claim  regional  leadership,  including  on  the 

geopolitical  agenda.  In  the  previous  sub-chapter,  it  was  noted  that  thanks  to 

BRICS, Saudi Arabia will be able to use the group's tools and platform to continue 

dialogue  with  Iran  within  the  framework  of  diplomacy.  However,  this  does  not 

negate  the  flip  side  of  the  coin  –  Tehran  and  Riyadh  have  overlapping  interests, 

they  are  competitors  for  geopolitical  leadership  in  the  region  and  have  some 

contradictions.  As  an  example,  Saudi  Arabia's  traditional  ties  with  the  West,  and 

with  the  United  States  in  particular,  and Iran's adversarial relations with the same 

West.  Such  factors  raise  the  question  of  how  the  KSA  can  navigate  the  complex 

dynamics  within  BRICS  when  it  joins  there.  After  all,  the  country  needs  to  take 

into account the preservation of its strategic autonomy and regional leadership. 

 
49 

The conclusion in this case may be the fact that such contradictions, rivalries 

and the struggle of interests within the bloc make BRICS heterogeneous and create 

difficulties  in  its  nature.  In  such  an  environment,  it  may  not  be  easy  for  Saudi 

Arabia to pursue its interests and use the association to its advantage by 100%. 

3.2.3  Limited  Integration  into  BRICS Financial Mechanisms. Dependence on 

Western Financial Institutions 

The  limitations  of  integration  into  BRICS  financial  mechanisms  and  their 

own  limitations  at  the  moment  can  fully  indicate  a  significant  disadvantage  and 

obstacle for Saudi Arabia to fully join the group. This point is extremely important 

for  consideration  and  analysis  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  process  that  BRICS 

seeks  to  build  in  an  inclusive  manner  from  Western  institutions,  however,  it 

currently  faces  a  number  of  structural  and  institutional  constraints.  And  these 

factors, in turn, slow down integration, limit inclusive financial transactions within 

the association and maintain dependence on Western institutions for their financial 

activities.  And  these  difficulties  are  also  compounded  by  the  asymmetry  of  the 

economies  of  the  participants  and,  as  a result, their goals and approaches, as well 

as  the  continuing  role  of  the  dollar  in the global economy. It is worth mentioning 

the  latter  in  a  little  more  detail.  Indeed,  the  dollar  still  occupies  a  huge  share  in 

world  reserves  and is the currency of international trade (this was stated earlier in 

the  previous  sub-chapter,  where  the  issue  of  de-dollarization  was  discussed). The 

same  applies  to  Saudi  Arabia,  whose  reserves  are  mostly  in  dollars,  and  the 

currency  has  long  been  pegged  to  the  American  one.  It  is  certainly  fair  to  talk 

about  the  intentions  and  aspirations  of  the  BRICS  bloc  to  reduce  dependence  on 

the dollar and more frequent settlements in local currencies, but this process is still 

at an early stage and requires a more thorough approach to take into account all the 

complications along the way. That is why it is worth analyzing the limited financial 

mechanisms  of  BRICS  and  dependence  on  Western  financial  institutions  as  a 

significant  obstacle  for  Saudi  Arabia to finally accept the invitation and fully join 

the association. 

 
50 

Starting  with  the  limited  financial  transactions  and  mechanisms  within  the 

block,  it  is  worth mentioning the New Development Bank, which was established 

back  in  2014 and is essentially the center of the organization's financial activities. 

According to its establishment agreement (2014), it is stated that the operations of 

this  financial  institution  can  be  carried  out  in  the local currency of the country in 

which  the  operation  is  conducted.The  Bank  and  the  countries  are  actively 

considering  such  a  possibility  and  are  trying  to  practice  it.  This  issue  became 

particularly acute after the crisis in Ukraine, when Russian assets were frozen and 

a large number of economic sanctions were imposed. As for the bank, in 2023, the 

bank  is  still  more  dependent  on  the  dollar,  which  is  essentially  a  guarantee  of its 

survival.  This  is  also  evidenced by the fact that local currency financing accounts 

for  only  22%  of  the  bank's  portfolio,  and  according  to  the  NDB  (2023),  the  new 

president  aims  to  increase  this  figure  to 30% by 2026. This, in turn, may indicate 

that  the  main  financial system and BRICS institutions still rely heavily on the US 

dollar, and initiatives to transition to their own system are still in their early stages, 

which  to  some  extent  may be an obstacle and narrow the planning horizon on the 

part  of  Saudi  Arabia.  This  is  also  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  although  BRICS  is 

taking steps to reduce dependence on the SWIFT system, such as the development 

of  BRICS  Pay  and  BRICS  Bridge,  some  projects  and  initiatives  are  still  in  the 

testing phase and are unable to replace existing mechanisms. Of course, at the click 

of  a  finger,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  immediately  replace  or  offer  a  workable 

alternative that would still suit the partner countries and members of the bloc. Such 

mechanisms  and  initiatives  are  now  positioned  more  as  an  addition  to  SWIFT, 

rather than its full alternative. It is fair to confirm this by saying that technological 

barriers  also  create  some  difficulties  and complicate the process, for example, the 

introduction  of  blockchain  and  digital  currencies  requires  time  and  coordination 

between countries with different levels of digitalization. 

Saudi Arabia's limited integration into the BRICS financial mechanisms can 

also  be  traced  to  the  institutional  weakness  of  the  association.  This  is  reflected 

primarily  in  the  fact  that  the  group  remains  an  informal  association  that does not 

 
51 

have  a  charter  (such  as  in  an  international  organization)  or  supranational  bodies 

that  could  more  effectively  regulate  the  activities  of  members  and  partners.  An 

important  limitation  here  is  the  ability  to  make  binding  decisions.  For  Saudi 

Arabia,  this  can  be  both  a  positive  point  (from  the point of view of its individual 

approach  and  the  use  of  BRICS  as  a  tool  without  serious  obligations),  and  a 

negative  aspect  (as  an  example,  the  difficulty  of  forecasting  or  promoting  any 

initiatives  through  institutional  procedures).  Moreover,  institutional  weakness  is 

reflected  in  the  absence  of  a  single  market,  unlike  the  EU,  for  example.  BRICS 

does  not  have  a  common  customs  union  or  other  standards  for  regulating market 

relations, which is also more likely to be a repulsive factor for the KSA. This is fair 

to say, since the institutional weakness does not allow influencing the members of 

the  association,  for  example,  to  facilitate  the  fulfilment  of  obligations  to  other 

actors. 

And  finally,  a  single  currency is a rather important aspect from the point of 

view  of  the  economy  and  the  financial  component  of  the  group.  To  be  more 

precise,  its  absence  at  the  moment.  The  analysis  of  this  aspect  has  already  been 

partially  touched  upon  in  the  previous  sub-chapter,  where  its  creation  and 

promotion  of  initiatives  for  trading  a  single  new  currency  were  discussed.  In  the 

same  sub-chapter,  it  should  be  said  that  the  creation  of  a  currency  has  not 

progressed  at  the  moment  and  remains  within  the  framework  of  initiatives  and 

active  discussions.  Here  it  is  worth  mentioning  a  number  of  reasons  why  this 

process  is  difficult.  First  of  all,  this  may  be  due to differences in macroeconomic 

policies and distrust of the dominance of the yuan or ruble within the framework of 

the  association.  China  and  Russia  are  rightly  considered  the  leading  BRICS 

economies,  and  their  size  and  influence  on  the  union  are  indisputable.  However, 

this  situation  complicates  the  adoption  and  functioning  of  the  single  currency,  if 

you think about it a little more deeply. Russia and China act as excellent examples 

of  the  opposite  here  - Russia's currency, the ruble, largely depends on oil exports, 

and  China,  in  turn,  is  an active consumer of it. Its currency is more dependent on 

exports,  which  are  driven  by  production  volumes  (which  depend  on  energy 

 
52 

consumption). What will the BRICS currency be pegged to, if there is one? This is 

a  big  question,  because  the  group  includes  many  economies  of  the  world,  whose 

currencies  depend  on  various  factors  and  indicators.  And  how  to  balance  such  a 

single  currency,  if  necessary,  also  remains  a  serious  question,  because  different 

economies sometimes need diametrically different monetary policies. Such aspects 

can  very  strongly  manifest  themselves  and  influence  in  times  of  crisis.  For 

example, we can cite a good analogy from history, when after the 2008 crisis, there 

were  not  enough printed euros for the PIGS countries (Portugal, Italy, Greece and 

Spain)  in  the  European  Union.  Large  economies,  such  as  Germany  and  the 

Netherlands,  had  enough  of  these  euros,  but  smaller  and  less  economically 

developed  countries  did  not.  But  printing  even  more  currency  would  have  led  to 

serious  inflation  and  worsened  the  situation  with  larger  economies,  which  at  the 

interim  stage  had  enough  euros  to  recover.  This  example  also  demonstrates  that 

small European economies began to go into debt in order to recover from the crisis, 

and as a prime example, Greece's default. This analogy demonstrates very well and 

clearly  how  the  diversity  of  countries  and  economies  within  an  organization  or 

association  with  a  single  currency  can  affect  crisis  situations  and  other  situations 

related  to  the  joint  resolution  of  financial  issues.  BRICS  currency  should  be 

considered as an addition to national currencies for internal settlements. 

Another  thing  worth  mentioning  about  BRICS  currency  is  the  strong 

dependence  of  economies  and  trade  on  the dollar. The countries of the group still 

rely  on  the  dollar  and  it  plays its key dominant role. US President Donald Trump 

has  clearly  made  it  clear  to  BRICS  his  opinion  and  attitude  towards  attempts  to 

create  a  new  single  currency  and replace the dollar in trade. His first statement in 

December  2024  in  X  (2024),  indicates  that  the  BRICS  countries  should  expect 

100%  tariffs,  as  well  as  wait  for  sales  to  stop  in  the  “wonderful  U.S. Economy”. 

This  is  essentially  a requirement and some kind of ultimatum, which should warn 

the  BRICS  states  and  it  partners  against  attempts  to  replace  the  dollar  and 

challenge  its  leading  role.  In  January  2025,  Trump  again  posted  an identical post 

on  his  social  network  Truth  (2025).  This  indicates  the  serious  intentions  of  the 

 
United  States  to  fight  and  impose  serious  economic  sanctions  on  BRICS,  if 

53 

necessary. 

For  Saudi  Arabia,  this  should  serve  rather  as  a  signal  and a warning not to 

take drastic steps, including those related to full membership in BRICS. Such facts 

indicate the existing obstacles and the reasons why the Kingdom is probably still at 

the  stage  of careful consideration of its membership in the bloc. The imperfection 

of  financial  mechanisms  and  heavy  dependence on Western economic institutions 

do not allow us to fully make independent decisions and not rely on the dollar, for 

example.  In  such  a  situation,  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  KSA  to  plan a strategy 

and  make  forecasts  within  the  framework  of  its  own  interests  through  the  use  of 

BRICS.  Dollar  hegemony  and  potential  sanctions  may  slow  down  the  process  of 

full  integration  with  the  bloc  or  discourage  it  altogether.  Although  projects  and 

initiatives  within  BRICS  are  showing  progress,  their  implementation  requires 

overcoming the structural barriers that are present in the organization. It is at these 

early  stages  of  the  BRICS'  efforts  to  reduce  dependence  on  Western  financial 

institutions  that  Saudi  Arabia  can  act  as  a  small  planning  horizon  for  its  further 

development,  potentially  being  in  BRICS.  And  of  course,  it  is  worth  mentioning 

once again the Kingdom's strong dependence on the United States financially. This 

means  that  KSA's  total  investments  in  the  US  economy  are  huge,  and in January 

2025,  MBS  promised  to  invest  600  billion  in  the  US  economy  over  4-6  years, 

according to Reuters (2025). In other words, KSA is seriously stuck with its money 

in  the  United  States.  And  these  investments  need  to  be  protected,  for  example, 

from  possible  freezes  (as  was the case with Russia and its assets in Europe). This 

seems  to  be  almost  the  main  obstacle  that  the  KSA  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to 

overcome. 

3.2.4 The BRICS Energy Policy May Not Coincide with the Interests of Saudi 

Arabia 

And  finally,  the  next  important  aspect  that  can  largely  determine  the 

full–fledged  participation  of  Saudi  Arabia in BRICS is energy policy. To be more 

 
54 

precise,  the  problem  is  the  divergence  of  energy  policy  and  views  in  this  area 

between the countries of the bloc and the Kingdom. It's no secret that Saudi Arabia 

is  the  largest  oil  exporter  in  the  world.  Its  geo-political  ambitions,  as  well  as  its 

overall  policy  strategy,  rely  heavily  on  oil  and  oil  revenues.  Of  course,  we  can 

recall  the  Vision  2030  plan,  which  seeks  to  reduce  the  share  of  the  Kingdom's 

income  from  energy  resources,  as  well  as  build  its  own  energy  system  (for 

example,  the  development  of  solar  energy).  However,  the  country  is  still  very 

dependent  on  the  monetization  of oil reserves, and the transition and the desire to 

change  this  requires  some  time  and  serious  efforts  in  this  regard.  As  part  of  the 

reason that may stop Saudi Arabia from fully joining BRICS, it is worth discussing 

the  possible  strong  divergence  of  views  within  the  group  on  energy  policy.  This 

may  be  expressed  in pressure on the Kingdom from other members or partners of 

the  group to apply certain policies regarding oil production and other actions with 

it  that  the  country  probably  would  not  like  to  do.  Moreover,  serious  competition 

(for  example,  with  Russia)  within  the  association  itself  may  also  play  out for the 

worse.  And  in  general,  oil  dependence  is  likely  to  have  a  negative  impact on the 

energy  transition,  which  will  make  it  difficult  and  force  the  KSA  to  choose  a 

different path of development, while other major BRICS members will fight for the 

agenda  and  promote  interesting  initiatives  (such  as  China  or  India).  That  is  why 

this  aspect  can  be  stated  as  an  obstacle,  because  Saudi  Arabia  may  face 

fundamental contradictions between its energy strategy and the BRICS policy. And 

these  disagreements,  in  turn,  fully  affect  both  economic  priorities  and  long-term 

geopolitical goals. 

First of all, it is worth focusing on the contradictions and some competition, 

which  can  become  one  of  the  decisive  factors  for  the  KSA.  Of  course,  we  are 

talking about Russia and Saudi Arabia (as a partner and potential BRICS member), 

which are competing for dominance in the oil market. Historically, there have been 

serious  tensions  and  contradictions  between  the  countries  against  the background 

of oil policy. This is evidenced by their price war in 2020, which was launched by 

Saudi  Arabia.  This  confrontation  resulted  in  the  collapse  of  quotations  and  the 

 
55 

energy  market  as  a  whole.  According  to  CNN  (2020),  this  happened  against  the 

background  of  Russia's  refusal  to  accept  OPEC's  proposal  to  help  restore  the  oil 

market  due  to  the  coronavirus  by  reducing  oil  production.  This  contradiction 

almost immediately led to a 10% drop in oil prices, and Saudi Arabia, for its part, 

further  aggravated  the  situation:  the  Kingdom  lowered  official  selling  prices  for 

April  by  $  6-8  in  an  attempt  to  regain  market  share  and  increase  pressure  on 

Russia. The oil price war began, which led to a quarterly drop in oil prices by 65%. 

There  is  no  need  to  go  particularly  deep  into  this  confrontation, it is essential for 

analysis  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  Russia  can  again  take  the  other  side  and 

choose its policy regarding oil resources, since it is also very dependent on energy 

exports.  It  is  important  to  note  that  Saudi  Arabia  wants  to  pursue  a  sovereign 

energy  policy,  and  its  presence  in  BRICS  as  a  full-fledged  member with a strong 

energy  industry  may  overlap  with  the  interests  of  other  strong  and  influential 

members, such as Russia or, for example, China. The heterogeneity of the group in 

this  case is expressed in the fact that some countries in it are highly dependent on 

the  export  of  oil  resources  (such  as  Russia),  while  others  depend  on  imports 

(China).  This  can,  of  course,  be expressed in differences of opinion and views on 

oil  policy,  when  lower  prices  and  quotations  may  be  beneficial  to  one  side,  but 

completely unprofitable to the other. Moreover, competition with Russia within the 

framework  of BRICS may further be expressed for the export of energy resources 

to developing China, which may create friction and some contradictions. 

In  defence  of  the  argument  about  the desire to pursue a sovereign policy in 

the field of energy and energy resources, it is worth quoting the statement in March 

2023  by the Minister of Energy of Saudi Arabia, Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman. In 

his interview with Energy Intelligence (2023), he stated that if any country tries to 

impose  a  price  ceiling  on  Saudi  oil  exports  (for  example,  as  it  was  done  against 

Russia  amid  the  Ukrainian  crisis),  Saudi  Arabia  will  no  longer  trade  with  such  a 

country.  Such  a  statement  makes  clear  the  existing  importance  of  the  oil  market 

and  the  country's  oil  dependence,  which  still  exists.  The  KSA  is  ready  to  act 

decisively  in  the  event  of  a  threat  to  its  sovereign  development  and  the  vital  oil 

 
56 

component of its economy. This was the case in 2020 during the oil price war with 

Russia,  which  was  provoked  by  Saudi  Arabia.  This  approach  makes  it  clear  that 

being  in  BRICS  requires  much  more attention from the Kingdom and the need to 

keep abreast of such situations. This, in turn, can act as an obstacle in terms of full 

integration. 

Of course, there are no special bodies or instruments in BRICS to force other 

countries  to  comply  with  the  agenda  and  follow  one  or  another  policy,  including 

energy policy. However, the influence of large members of the United Nations can 

largely  determine  the  course  of  the  bloc,  and the influence of such members may 

affect  the  possibility  of  promoting  the  energy  policy  they  need,  which  may  not 

coincide  with  the  policies  and  aspirations  of,  for  example, smaller and influential 

members – Saudi Arabia. For example, the KSA, as already noted, has historically 

had  an  economy  based  on oil exports, which provides a significant part of budget 

revenues.  At  the  same  time,  BRICS  is  moving  towards  reducing  dependence  on 

hydrocarbons,  especially under the influence of China and India (large, influential 

and  fundamental  members  of  the  bloc).  For  example,  President  Xi  Jinping, 

according  to  CNBC  (2020), announced at the United Nations in 2020 his plans to 

achieve  carbon  neutrality  by  2060  (to  become  “carbon  neutral"),  and  to  achieve 

“peak  carbon”  emission  by  2030.  And  India,  in  turn,  according  to  the  country's 

Ministry  of   New  and  Renewable  Energy  (2025),  is  investing  $4.3  billion  in 

hydrogen  technologies  by  2030  and  is  generally  very  interested  in  their 

development. This again confirms the fact that there is competition for the agenda 

– each individual member will seek to use BRICS primarily for their own benefit, 

as  a  tool.  Such  “competitions”  can  be  fairly  regarded  by  Saudi  Arabia  as 

interfering with its own energy policy, which may delay the Kingdom in its role as 

a partner rather than a full-fledged member. 

In  summary,  it  can  be  stated  that  the  energy  interests  of  Saudi  Arabia  and 

BRICS  remain  partially  incompatible  and  sometimes  contradictory.  Due  to  its 

continued dependence on oil resources, the Kingdom is forced to focus on them for 

the most part, since oil allows it to finance large-scale projects and set the vector of 

 
57 

development.  For  example, the BRICS group may be focused on diversifying and 

reducing the role of hydrocarbons under the influence of its large and fundamental 

members. The conflict of interests and the desire to set the agenda may complicate 

Saudi Arabia's adaptation of its strategy, which still relies heavily on oil revenues. 

3.3 Conclusion On the Chapter 

An analysis of the reasons and factors that make joining BRICS an attractive 

prospect  for  Saudi Arabia, as well as factors that push the country away from full 

integration, is extremely important for studying the understanding and ambitions of 

the  KSA  against  the  background of these processes. Such an analysis provides an 

understanding  of  the  approach  that  the  Kingdom  chooses  to  conduct  geopolitical 

affairs,  foreign  and  domestic  policy  in  general.  And  this  is  true  because  Saudi 

Arabia's  very  desire  for  cooperation  and  deepening  relations  with  BRICS 

represents a difficult balance between geopolitical ambitions, economic challenges 

and  institutional  constraints.  Understanding  Riyadh's  position  and  approach  to 

considering its full-fledged participation in the association lies through an analysis 

of the likely reasons for joining, as well as consideration of factors that hinder full 

integration. The impact of this is undeniable, as it directly affects the foreign policy 

plans  and  strategies  for  the  further  development  of  the  state  as  a  whole.  The 

analysis  conducted  in  this  second  chapter  demonstrates  that  Riyadh's  decision 

depends on its ability to align long-term strategic goals with current risks. 

Speaking  about  the  conclusion  for  reasons  that  are  attractive  and  generally 

act as potential advantages for Saudi Arabia through its full membership in BRICS, 

it  is  worth  noting  once  again  the  prospects for strengthening and expanding trade 

relations.  Multiple  incentives  underpin  this  initiative,  as  the  country's  tight 

integration into the institutional framework of the group will allow the Kingdom to 

gain  access  to  new  sales  and  trading  markets  in  other  developing  economies 

(which  are  full-fledged  BRICS  members  or  act  as  partners).  Strengthening  trade, 

expanding  trade  turnover,  and  strengthening  this  component  as  a  whole  is  in  the 

national  interests  of  Saudi  Arabia,  including  in  the  Vision  2030  plan.  The 

 
58 

advantages  for  the  Kingdom  are  also  hidden  in  other  economic  aspects,  such  as 

improved prospects for expanding investment partners and thereby diversifying its 

investment  portfolio.  Here,  BRICS acts as a tool and platform for communication 

with  the  necessary  and  interested  countries  in  order  to  establish  a  mutually 

beneficial dialogue between them and establish further cooperation. In this way, it 

will contribute to Saudi Arabia's steady development and leadership position in the 

region by strengthening and diversifying its economy. Another important economic 

and  geopolitical  aspect  that  is  important  to  mention  is  de-dollarization  and  the 

gradual departure from the system of Western financial institutions. Participation in 

BRICS  and  its  initiatives  may  allow  Saudi  Arabia  to  become  part  of  a  new 

inclusive  system  that  the  association  is  developing  by  creating  and  strengthening 

alternatives  to  dominant  Western  institutions,  including  financial  ones.  Such 

initiatives are primarily aimed at helping developing countries (which, in fact, also 

includes  the  CSA),  as  well  as  commitment  to  a  new  independent  system.  This  is 

once  again  in  the  interests  of  Saudi  Arabia,  which  welcomes  economic 

differentiation  and  the  search  for  a  balance  between  the  West  and  the  East  in  all 

approaches.  BRICS  acts  here  as  a  tool  that  could  contribute  to  the  goals  and 

interests of the Kingdom in this regard. And finally, as has already been concluded, 

there  is  a  strategy  of  geopolitical  balancing  and  differentiation  of  alliances  and 

partnerships.  This  is  a  very  attractive  aspect  for  Saudi  Arabia,  which,  in  turn,  is 

gradually moving away from its heavy unilateral dependence on the United States. 

The  BRICS  bloc  is  a  serious  and  growing  alternative  to  Western  associations, 

which  is  gradually  expanding and becoming a significant international unit that is 

gaining  its  role in the international arena, and this may be another opportunity for 

Saudi Arabia. 

However,  one  should  not  forget  about  the  most  important  obstacles  and 

reasons preventing Riyadh from full integration at the moment. Such factors reflect 

the  serious  dilemma  and  contradictions  of  full-fledged  entry  into  BRICS  at  the 

moment. Saudi Arabia understands the seriousness of such actions and statements, 

which  would  have  serious  consequences.  Here,  for  example,  it  is  worth 

 
59 

remembering  the  Kingdom's  continued  dependence  on  strong  historical  ties  with 

the United States in the field of security. These strong ties largely “tie the hands” of 

the Saudi leadership, since the existing dependence does not allow it to fully move 

away from this. One can also add the risk of alienating the United States and other 

Western  allies  if Riyadh is quick to accept the invitation to join the union. Here it 

should  be  said  about the calmness at the moment to stop fully relying on the help 

of the West and become independent from the point of view of ensuring their own 

security.  The  United  States  is  the  largest  supplier  of  weapons  to  the  KSA,  and is 

also interested in buying Saudi oil, so a more balanced and careful approach should 

be  taken  so  as  not  to  lose  the  most  important components of the advantages. The 

assertive  nature  of  the  BRICS  group  itself  is  also  worth  noting  as  a  serious 

obstacle.  The  heterogeneity  of  the  bloc  translates  into  emerging  or  existing 

contradictions between countries (such as China and India), which in turn make the 

BRICS environment difficult to make decisions or plan (for example, on the part of 

Saudi  Arabia).  Moreover,  following  the  self-interests  of  each  individual  country 

can make it difficult for the union to adopt a unified agenda or decisions, which is 

also  inconvenient  and  contradicts  the  plans  of  the  Kingdom,  which  is  primarily 

interested in its national ambitions. An important limitation is also present from the 

point  of  view  of  the  existing  dependence  on  Western  financial mechanisms (both 

on  the  part of Saudi Arabia and on the part of BRICS). It is also worth noting the 

imperfection  of  the  group's  internal  financial  institutions  at  the  moment,  which 

may  make  it  difficult  for  the  Kingdom  to  plan  long-term  and  take  advantage  of 

such a system. The existing dollar hegemony both in the reserves of countries and 

in  international  trade  (and  for  Saudi  Arabia,  also  in  oil  trade  and  the purchase of 

Western  weapons)  makes  the  circumstances  of  de-dollarization more complicated 

and  ornate.  BRICS  strives  to  develop  its  own  initiatives  and  projects,  but  their 

implementation  requires  overcoming  the  structural  barriers  that  are  present in the 

organization. Finally, an equally important point as the most important obstacle for 

Saudi  Arabia  is  the  possible  divergence  in  energy  policy  and  the  vision  of  the 

energy transition strategy as a whole. The interests of the Kingdom and the BRICS 

 
60 

countries can be called partially incompatible or contradictory, since the union, for 

example,  has  another  major oil exporter, Russia, a strong and influential player in 

the international arena, and there are also large oil consumers, developing countries 

(like China), who see energy policy differently and are interested in low oil prices. 

oil.  The  leading  economies  and influential countries of the association can pursue 

their  excellent  energy  policy,  as  well  as  promote  it  within  the  framework  of  the 

BRICS agenda and initiatives, which in turn may complicate the adaptation of their 

own strategy for Saudi Arabia with its strong reliance on oil revenues. 

Saudi  Arabia's  cooperation  with  BRICS  reflects  its  desire  for  multipolarity 

and  differentiation,  along  with  the choice of a balancing strategy. However, at the 

same  time,  cooperation  with  the  association  remains  limited  by  the  group's 

institutional  weakness  and  geo-economic  and  geopolitical  risks  for  the  Kingdom. 

Riyadh  is  sensitive  to  its  own  security  and  stability  for  the  sake  of  hypothetical 

benefits  that  BRICS can hardly guarantee right now in the moment. Nevertheless, 

in  the  long  term,  the  group  can  become  a  convenient  platform and tool for Saudi 

Arabia, which will pursue its own interests. This, in turn, will have a full impact on 

Riyadh's  strategy  in  international  relations,  which  will  affect  relations  with  other 

actors.  That  is  why  it  was  extremely  important  to  analyze  the  causes  and  factors 

that are both advantages and act as dampening barriers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Internal Political Factors and Foreign Policy Context As Driving 

Forces and Obstacles to Saudi Arabia's Entry Into BRICS 

61 

And at the end of this research work, within the framework of chapter 3, it is 

necessary  to  consider  domestic  level  of  analysis  of  the  country  and  the  internal 

political  situation  there.  This  will  be  done  first  of  all,  as  it  will  give  an 

understanding  of  the  motivations  of  the  Saudi  leadership,  namely,  Crown  Prince 

Mohammed bin Salman, to enter the foreign policy level in order to strengthen his 

figure  in  the  Kingdom.  The  analysis  of  the  internal  environment,  the  political 

situation,  and  how MBS came to power is one of the key ones in this study, since 

the  KSA  is  an  interesting  example  of  a  state  where  the  internal  political  struggle 

plays a very significant role and determines the behavior of the country as a whole, 

both  at  the  internal  and  external levels. Domestic political factors act as a driving 

force  and  encourage  MBS  to  act  at  the  foreign  policy  level  as  he acts nowadays, 

including  initiatives  towards  BRICS.  Moreover,  this  chapter  will  provide  a direct 

analysis,  including  of  foreign  policy  aspects  that,  together  with  internal  drivers, 

bring  the  country  closer  to  joining  BRICS,  which  is  just  a  part  of  the  extensive 

initiatives  of  Mohammed  bin  Salman,  who  wants  to  strengthen  his  figure  both 

within  Saudi  Arabia  and  on  the  global  stage  as  a  whole,  including  their  allies, 

partners,  or  potential  ties.  Moreover,  this chapter seeks to analyze and answer the 

question of why the Kingdom is still at the stage of considering its side within the 

framework  of  full-fledged  membership  in  BRICS.  In  many  ways,  this  is 

determined  precisely  by  foreign  policy  forces  and  actors,  but  the  cumulative 

analysis  conducted  in  the  third  chapter  of  this  study  seeks  to  provide  a 

comprehensive  understanding  of  Saudi  Arabia's  motivations  for  joining  BRICS 

from the figure of Mohammed bin Salman, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, and 

also illustrates the main interrelated reasons why the country is slow to fully join. 

 
62 

4.1  The  Internal  Context:  The  Struggle  of the Elites, Reforms and Economic 

Constraints. How Does This Affect Integration with BRICS 

First  of  all,  it  will  be  an  extremely  important  step  to  sort  out  the  domestic 

political  aspect  of  Saudi  Arabia.  Through  an  internal  analysis,  Mohammed  bin 

Salman (MBS), the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, who actually leads the country 

and makes important political decisions, will have to be analyzed from the point of 

view of his desire to join BRICS structure, as well as to figure out why the country 

suddenly  suspended  its  full-fledged  entry  into  the  association,  as  reported  by  the 

Saudi foreign commerce minister in Davos, according to Reuters (2024). The KSA 

is  an absolute monarchy, so sometimes it can be said or thought that the state acts 

as  a monolithic actor that makes political decisions both at the domestic level and 

in  the  foreign  policy  field.  However,  this  is  not  entirely  true,  and  even  within  a 

state  like  Saudi  Arabia,  there  are internal contradictions that do not allow to fully 

act  this  way.  They  consist  of  different  views  on  the  implementation  of  drastic 

reforms  and  the  reformist  discourse  of  MBS  as  a  whole.  Additionally,  relative to 

the  Kingdom,  one  can  also  notice 

trends 

in  power  struggles,  political 

confrontations  between  elites,  and  even  members  of  the  royal  family.  Moreover, 

the difficult economic situation in the country, namely with financing, in particular 

large projects (such as NEOM or initiatives within the Vision 2030), which largely 

determines  the  actions  of  the  Saudi  leadership  and  has  a  direct  impact  on  taking 

serious  steps  in  foreign  policy,  such  as  joining  BRICS.  It  is  worth  starting  an 

analysis  through  the  prism  of  the  internal  situation  that,  in  terms of its impact on 

foreign policy, including the Kingdom's integration with the BRICS bloc. 

It would be logical to start with perhaps the key figure in Saudi Arabia at the 

moment – Mohammed bin Salman (MBS), the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia. It is 

worth  noting  that  the  path  to  his  supremacy  was  not  easy.  He  rose  through  the 

direct  patronage  of  his  father, King Salman. Initially, after assuming the throne in 

2015,  the  king  appointed  Muhammad  bin  Nayef  (MBN),  the  nephew  of  the  old 

king,  as  his  successor.  As Ottaway (2021) notes in his work, such a step was also 

taken because King Salaman's three brothers were still alive, but they were too old 

 
63 

to  be  appointed  crown  princes.  There are also opinions that these brothers simply 

did  not  participate  in  the  political  “games”  for  the  throne.  But  today  we  have  a 

different picture: the Crown Prince is MBS, not MBN. This is really not a mistake 

but  rather  the  outcome  of  the  approach  of  Mohammed  bin  Salman,  who  secured 

this place through political confrontations and intrigues. In 2017, the king changed 

the royal line of succession by appointing his son Crown Prince. Of course, such a 

step violated the right of seniority, because MBS is not the eldest in the family who 

could apply for this position, and in fact, as it was said initially, the king appointed 

MBN  as  the  successor  to  the  throne.  All  this  happened  precisely  in favour of the 

current crown prince, as he managed to make the so-called "soft coup" (taken from 

the  book  Ottaway  2021),  which  allowed  him  to  consolidate  power  in  his  own 

hands.  One  of  the  most  effective  and  important  steps  was  the  so-called 

"anti-corruption" campaign, which was launched in November 2017. It resulted in 

the  detention  of  more  than  300 high-ranking figures, including princes, ministers, 

and  businessmen.  They  were  detained  on  charges  of  fighting  corruption.  As 

reported  by  Reuters  (2017),  detentions  and  house  arrest  took  place  at  the  luxury 

Ritz-Carlton  Hotel  in  Riyadh.  Among  the  detainees  was  one  of  the  most  famous 

billionaires  in  the  Middle  East,  Prince  Al  Waleed  bin  Talal,  who  has  significant 

international  influence  and  capital,  respectively.  In  fact,  through  this  campaign, 

MBS  consolidated  his  control  and  consolidated  his  hold  on  power.  Through  this 

“purge,” the prince managed to eliminate the opposition from among the elites who 

were  his  political  opponents.  Moreover,  he  managed  to  weaken  the  independent 

centres of financial power, and this also led to the undermining of intra-royal trust 

and solidarity. And of course, MBS took an extremely important step – he actually 

eliminated the former Crown Prince Muhammad bin Nayef (MBN), the nephew of 

King Salman and the former Interior Minister, from the “race for the throne.” It is 

worth  noting  that  MBN  was  an  extremely influential political figure and also had 

good  support  from  the  United  States,  especially  in  the  fight  against  terrorism. 

According to former Saudi Arabian journalist Hana Al-Khamri (Al Jazeera, 2020), 

in 2017 MBN was removed from all posts and placed under house arrest, and later, 

 
64 

in  March  2020,  he  was  arrested  on  charges  of  "state  conspiracy". It is also worth 

noting briefly such steps on the part of Mohammed bin Salman as the promotion of 

non-royal  persons  to  high-ranking  positions,  which  historically  and  traditionally 

were  occupied  by  members  of  the  royal  family.  For  example,  as  Davidson notes, 

the  most  famous  of  them  was  Saud  Al-Qahtani,  who  in  December  2015  was 

appointed communications adviser with the rank of minister. The author notes that 

he  actually  headed  the  newly  created  Center  for  Research  and  Media  Relations, 

which  in  turn  was  created  to  focus  on  shaping  the  agenda  of  local  media  and 

organizing  interviews  for  foreign  journalists  with  MBS.  Or  another  example  of 

how  Turki  Al-Sheikh,  who,  according  to  Arab  News  (2018),  initially  started  his 

career in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but then in 2015 was appointed adviser to 

the  Royal  Court  at  MBS,  and  then  in  2017  by  royal  decree  (where  MBS  was 

probably  involved)  was  appointed  royal  adviser.  After  that  he  held  the  rank  of 

minister and then became the head of the GSA (Global Strategic Alliance Co.). In 

this  way,  the  prince  gathered  around  him  trusted  people  whom  he  could  trust. 

Finally,  it  is  interesting  that  the  previously  independent  and  influential  post  of 

Defense Minister was considered a significant force in the political game and arena 

within  Saudi  Arabia,  but  as  Davidson  notes  in  his  chapter  on  MBS,  the  prince 

managed  to  quickly  and  effectively  combine  the  elements  of  this  completely 

autonomous  position  under his system, thereby expanding the network of his own 

patronage.  

This  analysis  is  important  in  terms  of  the  consequences  of  such  political 

actions  by  MBS.  Such  initiatives  caused  deep  instability,  which,  combined  with 

growing  economic  difficulties,  created  a  hostile  environment  within the House of 

Saud  for  Mohammed  bin  Salman,  and  also  contributed  to  the  intensification  of 

hostile  sentiments  towards  him. The very decision to bypass the succession to the 

throne,  which  had  remained  traditional  before  him,  as  well  as  his  actions  to 

centralize  power  by  appointing  close  people  and  purges, led to tension within the 

royal family. And this, in turn, jeopardized the internal consensus of the Kingdom's 

monarchy.  Moreover,  an  important  aspect  here  is  the  fact  that  the  current  Crown 

 
65 

Prince  has  undermined  the  existing  rules  for  the  distribution  of  power  and 

influence,  which eventually led him to a path unknown, competitive, not the most 

stable, and new, both for him and for the whole country. Such a power struggle has 

shaken the solid foundation that has served as a solid pillar that has kept the royal 

family in power for a long time. This is also why MBS, which is now effectively in 

charge  of  internal  and  external  political  decisions,  faces  the  challenge  of 

confirming and strengthening its legitimacy. 

But  just  to  gain  the  so-called  “points”  in  favour  of  his  own  legitimacy,  he 

needs  to  earn  popularity  and  expand  his  influence.  It  is  possible  to  receive  these 

“points”  both  within  the  state  (through reforms and gaining popularity among the 

population, which will be discussed later) and at the external level (participation in 

international  initiatives;  the  foreign  policy  aspect will be discussed in more detail 

in  the  next  sub-chapter). Against this background, the question of joining BRICS, 

for  example,  arises,  since  by  doing  so,  MBS  seeks  to  gain  support  among  the 

growing  economies  of  this  informal  association.  This  stands  out  especially 

characteristically  in  the context of deteriorating relations with the United States, a 

long-time  ally  and  influential  partner  of  Saudi  Arabia.  The  deterioration  of  the 

internal  environment  among  the  political  elite,  which  was  once  generated  by  the 

Crown  Prince,  serves  as  a shaky field for increasing his own legitimacy, which in 

turn  is  a  reason  to  seek  support  at  the  external  level,  for  example,  in  BRICS. 

Successful  participation  in  external  initiatives  would  probably  strengthen  the 

Crown  Prince's  figure  in  the  eyes  of  his  audience  (due  to  his  drastic  internal 

reforms)  –  youth  and  women,  and  even  more  likely  would  increase support from 

people  who  were  disappointed  by  unsuccessful  early  decisions.  For  the  young 

population, for example, a step towards BRICS could be regarded as a clear sign of 

the  independence  of  MBS  from  Washington, and to a certain extent would justify 

the funding cuts that MBS went to as a result of budget shortages. And BRICS can 

also  become  an  initiative  that  can  provoke  a  positive  reaction  from  the  clerical 

elite, who harbor strong anti-American sentiments due to the deployment of infidel 

armed forces in the holy land of the KSA during the “Desert Storm”. 

 
66 

And  as  already  mentioned,  one  of  the  ways  is to try to create and maintain 

your  own  popularity  –  through  internal  reforms.  And  here  it  is  worth  saying that 

the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammed bin Salman, has chosen a very new 

and modern approach to internal affairs. According to the BBC (2017), MBS chose 

the  path  of  "moderate,  balanced"  Saudi  Islam,  which  is  essentially  a  path  of 

changing  the  strict  form  of  Sunni  Islam  known  as  Wahhabism.  Previously,  the 

Kingdom  had  strict  moral  principles  and  norms,  which  were  not  disputed  in  any 

way.  This  was  especially  noticeable  with  regard  to  the  restriction  of  the rights of 

women  and  religious  minorities.  MBS  expressed  his  intention  to  reform  such  an 

order,  making  it more modern, minimizing the role of Saudi religious institutions, 

which  were  once  considered  critically  important  for  the  monarchy.  For  example, 

MBS  allowed  women  to  drive  a  car,  which  indicates  the  intentions  and  decisive 

actions  of  the  prince  as  part  of his reform course. However, this course of reform 

ran  counter  to  the  position  of  the  traditional  approach,  such  as  the  Wahhabi 

establishment  and  the  clergy.  As  Ottaway  (2021)  noted,  MBS  was  replacing  this 

very  establishment  in order to create for himself a new main political base, which 

he was looking for in the eyes of Saudi youth and women waiting for the promised 

reforms.  The  so-called  “Saudi  populism”  took  place  in  this  case,  which  Ottaway 

(2021)  calls  Saudi  nationalism,  led  by  MBS  as  a  great  reformer.  But  of  course, 

there  was  resistance  from  Wahhabi  clerics  and  high-ranking  influential  people, 

which  only  increased  instability and division, which in turn prevented the gaining 

of “points” for the legitimacy of Mohammed bin Salman. 

In  this  aspect,  we  can  give  a  very  reasonable  and  applicable  idea  from  the 

point  of  view  of the clash of cultures, which is becoming more and more obvious 

and  indisputable  in  Saudi  Arabia.  This  refers  to  the  thoughts  of political scientist 

Samuel  Huntington  (1968),  who  spoke  about  the  high  risk  of  failure  for 

modernizing  monarchs  (such  as  MBS  in  our  case).  This  risk  lies in the emerging 

gap  and  balancing  of  such  a  monarch  between  the  forces  of the old order (which 

oppose  reforms)  and  the  forces  created  by  the  reforms.  Samuel  Huntington 

believes that in this case, the monarch may even be overthrown by the forces of the 

 
67 

new  order  and  also  calls  this  phenomenon  “the  king's  dilemma.”  Wahhabi  forces 

are  opposed  to  such  drastic  reforms  in  the  case  of  Saudi  Arabia,  and  their  very 

importance  is  marked  by  the  long  history  of  being  an  important  and  mainstay  of 

the kingdom of Al-Saud, which is largely undermined by MBS.  

It  turns  out  that  due  to  the  unstable  environment  that  has  developed  as  a 

result  of  political  actions  and  other  initiatives  such  as  coordinated  reforms, 

Mohammed  bin  Salman  has  created  a  difficult  situation  for  himself  as  a possible 

future  ruler.  One  of  the  main  questions  for  him  remains  whether  he  will  retain 

power  and  ascend  to  the  throne  after  the  death  of  his  father,  who is currently the 

King  of  Saudi  Arabia.  As  a  political  figure,  MBS  is  a  special  example  among 

Middle Eastern reformers because he came to power at an early age and also chose 

a  very  controversial  path  of  reform  to  strengthen  his  legitimacy and power in the 

future. The Crown Prince's behavior is often described as impulsive, authoritarian, 

and  driven  by  personal  ambitions,  which  is  reflected  in  his  political  decisions, 

economic  initiatives,  and  management style. That is why MBS chooses to rely on 

external  relations  and  this  level  as  whole,  including  BRICS,  as  a  search  for 

support. 

The  economic  and  financial  aspects  speak  even  more  vividly  about  the 

existing  problematic  environment  under  Mohammed  bin  Salman.  In  2016,  the 

Vision  2030  plan  was  adopted,  which  provides  for  the  differentiation  of  the 

Kingdom's  economy,  important  reforms,  as  well  as  the  implementation  of  major 

projects (such as NEOM). Not the most competent management of the budget and 

finances  on  the  part  of  the  government  of  Saudi  Arabia,  namely  MBS, entails an 

increase  in  dependence  on  external  investments,  as  well  as  an  even  stronger 

strengthening of dependence on oil revenues (the share of which, according to the 

plan,  should  be significantly reduced by 2030). Davidson, in his chapter on MBS, 

notes  that  back  in  April  2016,  the  MBS  team,  responding  to  the  alleged  crisis, 

admitted  to  the international media that the country's expenses during the reign of 

King  Abdullah  were  simply  enormous  and  approximately  80-100  billion  dollars 

were spent inefficiently annually. With such a background, Mohammed bin Salman 

 
68 

came  to  power,  and  with  him, grandiose projects that required huge funding from 

the  budget,  which  had  yet  to  be  stabilized.  In  their  work  “Blood  and  Oil: 

Mohammed  bin  Salman's  Ruthless  Quest  for  Global  Power,” the authors Hope & 

Scheck  (2020)  highlight  the  Kingdom's  existing  heavy  dependence  on  foreign 

investment and global partnerships (which, by the way, may become BRICS in the 

future)  and  also  note  that  the  Vision  2030  program  risks  being  overly  ambitious 

and  underfunded.  In  many  ways,  foreign  partnerships  and  connections  have been 

shaken after the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi in 2018. The US report (Al 

Jazeera,  2021)  describes  the  assassination  operation  in  many  ways,  which in turn 

greatly  damaged  the  reputation  of  MBS  at  the  international  level.  Meanwhile, 

selected mega projects for the country totaled about $2 trillion to free Saudi Arabia 

from  dependence  on  oil,  according  to  Bloomberg  (2016).  However,  under  the 

leadership of Mohammed bin Salman, not the most successful initiatives have been 

noted,  which  have  greatly  increased  the  financial difficulties of the Kingdom that 

are  currently  being  observed.  Such  initiatives  include  the  costly  war  in  Yemen, 

which  is dragging on and still remains relevant, but in turn is not an example of a 

good  and  competent  policy  on the part of MBS and does not go into his “bank of 

points." It is also possible to note the ineffectual blockade of Qatar, which, in fact, 

ended  in  nothing  useful  for  Saudi  Arabia.  Reforms  are  hampered  by  a  lack  of 

budget,  and  their  scale  forces  the  country  to  take  loans  and  rely  even  more  on 

external  financing.  For  example,  according  to  the  Middle  East  Monitor  (2020), 

Saudi  Arabia  has  taken  out  a  loan  to  finance  part  of  its  mega-project  NEOM,  a 

futuristic  city-state  estimated  to cost $500 billion. The NEOM project is currently 

experiencing some difficulties, again due to its financial component. According to 

a  report  by  The  Wall  Street  Journal  (2025),  the  project  is  turning  into a financial 

disaster. As noted in the report, delays and cost overruns, which, by the way, have 

already  cost  about  $50  billion,  the  country  may  well  face  another  55  years  of 

construction. It is also noted that the projected cost of the project will be 8.8 trillion 

dollars.  This,  in  turn,  is  an  example  of  not  the  most  correct  and  predictable 

investments  on the part of the Saudi government, which exacerbate contradictions 

 
69 

among  the  elites  and  the  population.  And  to  confirm  the  difficulty with finances, 

we can cite the events of early 2025, which Saudi Arabia began with a $12 billion 

bond  issue  and  a  PIF  loan,  according  to  Bloomberg  (2025),  to  cover  the  prince's 

projects  and  initiatives.  It  cannot  be  said  that  all  this  together  benefits  the 

popularity and strengthening of his position (including in the future) for MBS. 

Collectively,  the  internal  aspect  includes  MBS  coming  to  power  through  a 

serious political struggle that created an unstable environment and attitude towards 

Mohammed  bin  Salman  on  the  part  of the elite; drastic reforms of public life and 

opposition to traditional foundations in order to gain a new base of support; as well 

as  not  the  most  successful  mega-projects  that  require  huge  finances  resulting 

decline  in  the  country's  budget  and  economy,  which  has  serious  consequences. 

These  consequences  create  difficulties  for  MBS  to  promote  his  position  and 

political  figure  as  the  future  King.  That  is  why  he  has  to  seek  support  and  gain 

“points”  in  favor  of  himself  at  the  external  level,  by depending on foreign policy 

actors  (for  example,  financially),  as  well  as  by  participating  in  BRICS-type 

initiatives  that  could  play  in  his  favor.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  the  internal 

environment,  which  MBS  himself  “tore  apart”  and  made  unstable,  pushes  him to 

justify and strengthen his legitimacy through BRICS for instance, an association in 

which  the  major  growing economies of the world – like China, Russia, India, and 

other  members  participate.  For  example,  taking  advantage  of  China's  great 

financial opportunities probably would be easier through the collective structure of 

BRICS  and  participation  in  group  initiatives  involving  Beijing.  The  influence  of 

such  foreign  policy  partners  as  large  economies  within  the  framework  of  the 

association can play an important role, and the success of the initiative with BRICS 

for Saudi Arabia will help MBS by being added to his “portfolio". 

4.2 The Foreign Policy Factor Behind the Idea of Integration with BRICS 

The  foreign  policy  factor,  or  the  external  level,  acts  as  one  of  the  most 

decisive  and  significant  motivators  for  Mohammed  bin  Salman  to  seriously 

consider  integration  into  BRICS.  The  previous  sub-chapter  analyzed  the  internal 

 
70 

aspect of the Kingdom, the environment and circumstances that did not work out in 

the best way for the government, namely MBS in particular, in order to confidently 

strengthen  its  own  position  among  the elite through internal reforms. That is why 

MBS  is  forced  to  seek  support  and  strengthen  his  political  figure  at  this  very 

external  level.  Of  course,  there  are  many  advantages  that  the  country  could  gain 

from  joining  BRICS  and  further  cooperation  with  it.  Similar  economic  (mainly) 

and  geopolitical  advantages  have already been discussed in the second chapter. In 

this  section,  it  is  planned  to  consider the foreign policy factor that determines the 

idea  of  Saudi  Arabia  joining  the  informal  association  of  developing  countries.  A 

more  detailed  analysis  will  be  carried  out  through  the  personality  of  Mohammed 

bin Salman, namely his desire to strengthen his figure on the external level (and by 

doing  that  on  internal  level  also).  Here  it  is  worth  noting  some  important drivers 

that are probably pushing MBS towards integration with BRICS. First of all, this is 

an internal factor, which was analyzed earlier, forcing us to act at the foreign policy 

level.  At  this  level,  it  is  worth  noting such a key figure as Mohammed bin Zayed 

Al  Nahyan  (aka  MBZ),  who  has  been  President  of the United Arab Emirates and 

Emir of Abu Dhabi since 2022. This figure is important for analysis at the foreign 

policy level, as she is a role model for Mohammed bin Salman, as well as to some 

extent  an  opponent  and  rival  in  terms  of  regional  dominance  (the  KSA  and  the 

UAE  are neighbors, as well as the large economies of the Middle East). And as is 

already  known,  the  United  Arab  Emirates  fully  joined  BRICS,  and  more 

importantly,  Saudi  Arabia  expressed  a  desire  to  join  the  group  at  about  the  same 

time as its neighbor, after which invitations were sent to them. This aspect is to be 

considered  as  one  of the fundamental drivers of MBS to keep up with MBZ. And 

of  course,  in  view  of  its  deterioration  and  some  cooling  in  relations  between  the 

KSA  and  the  United  States  (this  was  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Chapter  2),  the 

Kingdom,  led  by  the Crown Prince, seeks to create some kind of “pressure lever” 

and  counterweight  in  foreign  policy  partnerships  and  alliances.  Washington  is 

definitely  meeting  initiatives  to  integrate  with  BRICS  negatively,  because  as  it is 

known  and  as  stated  in  the  article  on  Maal  (2023),  for  the  United  States,  Saudi 

 
71 

Arabia  is  a  key  partner  and  ally  in  the  region,  as  well  as  the  main  buyer  of 

American  weapons  and  one  of  the  main  investment  centers (about $ 800 billion). 

Losing  touch  or  allowing  rapprochement  with  their geopolitical rivals (China and 

Russia  within  the  framework  of  BRICS)  is  definitely not beneficial or interesting 

for  Washington,  so  this  “pressure  lever” from Saudi Arabia may work in favor of 

Riyadh, as well as strengthen MBS as a strong geopolitical strategist and figure in 

general.  Such  initiatives  can  generally  benefit  Mohammed  bin  Salman,  because 

they  will  allow  him to gain so-called “points” in his favor, in order to consolidate 

himself in the future as the most suitable successor to the royal throne. 

First  of  all,  it  is  worth  starting  a  foreign  policy  analysis  precisely  from the 

point  of  view  of  the  orientation  of  policy  on  the  part  of  MBS  to  MBZ.  The 

connection  between  them  is  really  extremely  important  for  understanding  the 

current  situation,  as  well  as  analyzing  the  references  and  reasons  why the Crown 

Prince  of  Saudi  Arabia  nevertheless  took  important  and  great  steps  towards 

integration  with  BRICS.  This  connection  is  evident  in  some  kind  of  existing 

mentoring,  where  MBZ  acts  as  a  role  model  for  his  younger  colleague  from  the 

neighboring  Kingdom.  Davidson,  for  example,  notes  that  the  Crown Prince (now 

the president) of the UAE probably contributed to the rise of MBS, and also notes 

the  likelihood that MBZ acted as a consultant and directly provided its assistance. 

This is very important because in the Middle East there is a so-called high-context 

(a term coined by Edward T. Hall in 1959) characteristic of culture. It explains the 

importance  of  building  personal  relationships  and  their  key  importance  in  such 

cultures. Mutual relations and strong ties have a very strong impact in a region like 

the  Middle  East,  especially  among  states  with  a  monarchical  system  (the  KSA). 

That is why it is extremely important to note this linkage between MBS and MBZ, 

which  largely  predetermined  the  foreign  policy  decisions  of  the  Crown  Prince  of 

Saudi  Arabia  (including  the  intention  to  join  BRICS).  It  is also worth noting that 

Mohammed bin Zayed himself confessed to an American diplomat in 2005 that he 

was  very  concerned  about  the  possible  collapse  of  the  House  of  Saud  (regarding 

terrorist threats) and therefore there was a desire to help them, according to the US 

 
72 

Department  of  State  (2005).  However,  the  rhetoric  is  not  as  direct  and 

unambiguous  as  it  might  seem  at  first  glance.  For  example,  according  to  the  US 

Department  of  State  (2009),  the  UAE,  in  its  statements  about  close  ties  with  the 

Kingdom, privately considers Riyadh as the second largest security threat after Iran 

for  itself,  which  is  historically based on rivalry and hostility between states. This, 

in  turn, suggests that despite the close ties between the political representatives of 

these  countries,  over  the  past  decade  there  has  still been regional rivalry between 

the countries, sometimes some hidden confrontation for leadership. 

Revealing  in  more  detail  the  aspect  of  the  existing  imitation  on  the  part of 

MBS  towards  his  colleague  MBZ,  it  is  worth  noting  that  after  the  first  political 

advances  of  the  Crown  Prince  of  Saudi  Arabia,  as  stated  by  Davidson,  many 

assumed  that the so-called “symbiotic mentor-mentee relationship” had developed 

between  these  figures,  which  were  based  on  common  interests.  The  New  York 

Times  (2020),  for  example,  noted  a  similar  connection  between  the  two  men, 

saying  that  "MBS  ... in many ways is MBZ's protégé," and The Guardians (2018) 

wrote  that  Mohammed  bin  Zayed acted as a mentor to the young Mohammed bin 

Salman  on  his  way  up  the  political  ladder.  This  largely  explains  the  established 

bond between them, and also formed a kind of role model for the Crown Prince of 

Saudi Arabia, who was guided by his senior colleague in introducing international 

affairs  and  participating  in  joint  initiatives. Davidson also argues for international 

relations, namely, very specific actions on the part of MBS, which conducted joint 

actions  and  even  acted  under  the  leadership  of  MBZ,  such  as  in  2015,  after 

assuming  the  post  of  Defense  Minister  Mohammed  bin  Salman,  a joint operation 

with the UAE against the Houthi forces in Yemen began. Of course, both countries 

(the  KSA  and  the  UAE)  pursued  common  goals  in  the  war  in  Yemen,  but  the 

influence  of  a  senior  colleague  from  Abu  Dhabi  largely  predetermined  the 

discourse  and  actions  on  the  part  of  Riyadh.  It  is  also  noted  that  the  subsequent 

statements  towards  Iran  from  Saudi  Arabia  followed  this  discourse  and  largely 

coincided with the statements of MBZ. Moving further up the ladder to the title of 

Crown  Prince,  Davidson  notes  that  MBS  most  likely  enjoyed  the  support  of  the 

 
73 

UAE, as evidenced by the fact that Abu Dhabi secured the necessary support from 

the Kingdom within the framework of the anti-terrorism coalition (including Egypt 

and  Bahrain).  The  author  notes  that  this  was  probably  part  of  the  deal,  as  it 

happened  only  a  few  weeks  before  MBS  officially  assumed  the  role  of  Crown 

Prince  of  KSA.  Perhaps  it  is  thanks  to  MBZ's  help  and  influence  that  Saudi 

Arabia's crown Prince is now exactly the one we know. And, of course, this cannot 

but  affect  the  influence  of  the  figure  of  Mohammed  bin  Zayed  on  MBS  in  his 

further foreign policy affairs, including his intention to join BRICS. Moreover, it is 

vital to say that, of course, Mohammed bin Salman's track record in foreign policy 

leaves  much  to  be  desired.  As  previously  described,  the protracted war in Yemen 

and its cost do not play in favour of the politician, and is also essentially a failure. 

The failure also lies in the fact that through not the most thoughtful foreign policy 

initiatives,  Saudi  Arabia  lost  a  close  ally  in  this  war  – the United Arab Emirates. 

Moreover, the air, land and sea boycott of Qatar, which was not the most successful 

in terms of effectiveness, did not lead to anything (Qatar was greatly helped by the 

KSA's long–time opponent, Iran, a strong and influential player in the Middle East 

arena), although not a little effort was spent on this confrontation.  

From  this  point  of  view,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  initiatives  that  were 

quite  successful,  as  well  as  the  promotion  itself,  were  carried  out  thanks  to  the 

“patronage”  of  MBZ.  And  even  despite  the  deterioration of relations between the 

KSA  and  the  UAE,  it  would  be  fair  to  say  that  Mohammed  bin  Salman  is  still 

guided  by  the  foreign  policy  decisions  of  the  neighboring  country,  since  the 

mentoring  factor  has  played  a  key  role.  Perhaps  it  should  be said that against the 

background  of  major  failures  and  not  the  most  successful  internal  and  external 

initiatives,  following  and  wanting  to  keep  up  with  the  United  Arab  Emirates  is 

quite logical and one of the ways in which MBS strives to strengthen himself (after 

all,  it  was  thanks  to  his  mentor  that  he  managed  to  achieve  great  success).  Of 

course, this is not something unambiguous and is not openly stated, but it would be 

fair  to  note the existing connection and the “legacy” that led Saudi Arabia, led by 

Mohammed  bin  Salman,  to  strive  to  keep  up  with  the  UAE  and  look  at  their 

 
74 

foreign policy initiatives. The same applies to BRICS. Perhaps it was the UAE that 

served  as  an  important  driver  for  such  a  drastic  step  towards  joining  the 

association. Abu Dhabi has fully entered and become a member of the group, while 

Saudi  Arabia  is  still  considering the invitation it received, expressing its intention 

to join. It has already been mentioned about the significant advantages that Riyadh 

can  get  from  full-fledged  integration,  especially  with  regard  to  the  economy,  but 

this is also true for the UAE, as a growing and developing economy in the Middle 

East.  The  unwillingness  to  concede  to  its  rival for leadership in the region is also 

the reason for the Kingdom's actions to join BRICS. 

Finally,  it  is  worth  analyzing  the  United  States  of  America,  an  important 

strategic partner of the KSA. Saudi Arabia is the main buyer of weapons from the 

United  States,  and  at  the  same  time,  Saudi  Arabia  is  one  of  the  key  investment 

partners  (America has already invested about 800 billion dollars in the Kingdom), 

which  works  towards  greater  interconnection  between  states.  This  research  has 

previously  evaluated  the  fact  that  relations  between  the  two  countries  weakened 

and  cooled  during  the  Biden  administration.  This  is  very  consistent  with  Saudi 

Arabia's  efforts  to  reduce its strong unilateral dependence on its long-time ally by 

differentiating alliances and partnerships at the external level. However, it is worth 

noting  that  there  is  a  strong  and  lasting  connection  with  America,  and  the 

dependence  has  only  decreased  to  a  small  extent.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  the United 

States  considers  the  Kingdom  to  be  its  key  ally  in  the  Middle  East  region,  even 

more  specifically  in  the  Persian  Gulf.  For  Washington,  Saudi  Arabia  is  an 

important  partner  through  which  it  can  advance  its  interests  in  the  region  and 

strengthen  its  global  geopolitical  position.  Moreover,  it  is  also  important  for 

America  that  the  KSA  is  a  serious  player  in  terms  of  energy  trade  due  to  its 

extensive  oil  reserves,  as  well  as  natural  gas.  Having  strategic  and  partnership 

relations  with  one  of  the  dominant  players  in  the  oil and gas market is extremely 

important  for  Washington.  All  this  is  true  in  the  context  of  the  fact  that  the 

initiative  on  the  part  of  the  MBS  to  join  BRICS  is  strongly  linked,  among  other 

things,  to  the  desire  to  benefit  through  pressure  and  “flirting”  with  the  United 

 
75 

States.  The  BRICS  bloc  stands  for  multipolarity and a just world order, including 

seeking  to  challenge  the  global  dominance  of  the  West  (in  particular,  Russia  and 

China,  but  they  project  their  goals  and  urges  through  this  informal  association). 

From this point of view, America cannot be seriously concerned about Mohammed 

bin  Salman's  intentions  to  fully  join  BRICS  and  strengthen  integration with it. In 

addition,  the reasoning of Dr. Fawaz Al-Alamy (2023) can be consider, the expert 

states  that in the event of a possible escalation of the war in Ukraine into a World 

War,  Saudi  Arabia  could  use  the  so-called  “eastern  umbrella”  in  the  event  of  a 

clash of interests between the West and the East (represented by Russia and China), 

this in this way, the country could more successfully meet the pressure of the West, 

which  would  undoubtedly  be  present.  This  indicates  that  BRICS  can  help  the 

Kingdom cope with pressure and possible sanctions from the United States in case 

of a controversial or crisis situation in their relations. And although today the crisis 

in  Ukraine  does  not  portend  an  intensification  and  escalation  of  hostilities  to  a 

global level, BRICS can still serve as some kind of guarantor for the KSA, and in 

particular for MBS, to moderate balancing and create a “pressure lever” of pressure 

on the United States, which may be beneficial for the Kingdom. Indeed, against the 

background of Saudi Arabia's desire to join BRICS, America will probably want to 

establish closer partnerships with the Kingdom, thereby increasing the level of this 

partnership.  In  such  a  situation,  MBS  could  greatly  benefit  from  this in its future 

strategic steps – to take advantage of partnership with the United States on the one 

hand,  and  the  advantages  of  China's  rapidly  growing  influential  economy  on  the 

other hand (from both the West and the East). Creating a “lever” of pressure on the 

United  States  is  beneficial  for  obtaining  profitable  partnership  agreements  and 

strengthening  this  partnership with one of its main investors – the United States – 

because, as noted earlier, at the internal level of MBS's political activities, there is 

a strong need to finance his megaprojects, which in turn could play in favor of the 

Crown Prince himself. Saudi Arabia. 

Thus, highlighting the key points at the external level, it is important to note 

the existing manner of following MBZ's foreign policy decisions, since previously 

 
76 

such  a  format  allowed  for successful decisions, as well as this approach is caused 

by  the  need  to  keep  up  with  one  of  the  key  regional  rivals  (the  desire  to  take 

advantage  of,  for  example,  joining  BRICS,  which  in  one  way  or  another  to  a 

different  extent,  both  the  UAE  and  the  KSA  benefit).  Moreover,  joining  BRICS 

would  encourage  the  United  States  to  strengthen  its  relations  with  Saudi  Arabia, 

not  wanting  to  miss  it  and  give  it  more  to  its  opponents,  which  of  course  would 

allow the Kingdom to benefit from its own ambitions and objectives. The external 

level  is  extremely  important  and  necessary  for  MBS, as it is one of the few ways 

where  the  right  political  and  geopolitical  decisions  will  allow  him  to  elevate 

himself both within his own state and in the international arena. 

4.3 Why Has Saudi Arabia Not Fully Joined BRICS Yet? 

Finally,  at  the  end  of  this  important  chapter,  it  will  be  extremely  crucial to 

analyze  and  try  to  answer  the  question  why Saudi Arabia has not yet fully joined 

BRICS  as  it  originally  wanted.  Here,  of  course,  the  figure  of  Mohammed  bin 

Salman  will  be  touched  upon  again  in  one  way  or  another,  which,  as  already 

mentioned,  is  one  of  the  fundamental  drivers  (if  not  even  the  main  one)  in  the 

movement  towards  BRICS. In this sub-chapter, it is mainly the external factors of 

pressure  and  deterrence on Saudi Arabia's path to the group that will be analyzed. 

The  external  level  and  foreign  policy  aspects  largely  determine  the  degree  of 

initiative  and  speed  of  consideration  of  the  invitation  from  the  Kingdom.  One  of 

the  most  important  reasons  is  probably  the  fact  of  the  existing  and  remaining 

rivalry  with  Iran.  As  it  is  known,  Tehran  is  already  a  full-fledged  member  of 

BRICS, and this clearly complicates the situation for Saudi Arabia. Of course, the 

countries  restored  diplomatic  relations  in  2023  with  the  mediation  of  China,  but 

they  still  remain  each  other's  main  rivals  for  regional  influence  and  dominance. 

Iran has recently been actively involved in proxy conflicts in the Middle East, and 

for  some  time  now  it  has  been  supporting  the  Houthi  group  in  Yemen  (a  long, 

protracted  and  not  the  most  profitable  war  for  Saudi Arabia). This group is a key 

opponent  of  Riyadh  in  this  war,  and  the  group  also  significantly  complicates 

 
77 

navigation in the Red Sea, affecting the economic benefits of the KSA. Moreover, 

Iran is one of the key supporters of Hamas in the war against Israel, thereby acting 

as one of the main driving forces in the Middle East, trying to advance its influence 

and  strengthen  its  position.  This,  in  turn,  complicates  the  implementation  of  The 

India-Middle  East-Europe  Economic  Corridor  (IMEC),  which  is  the  most 

important  project  in  the  future  for  Saudi  Arabia  within  the  framework  of  Vision 

2030.  From  this  point  of  view,  Israel  and  the  United  States  can  be  mentioned, 

which  are  putting  pressure  on  Riyadh  not  to  join  BRICS,  where  Iran  is  present. 

And  Washington  and  Jerusalem  need  MBS  to  support  them  in  promoting  IMEC. 

And  of  course,  since  Riyadh  is  still  not  going  to  lose  one  of  its  key  allies  and 

suppliers  of  weapons  to  the  United  States  (and,  conversely,  Washington  is  not 

interested in losing the KSA), which would provide significant security guarantees. 

In turn, Russia and China (one of the main and significant forces of BRICS) They 

are  not  ready  to  replace  America  in  this  role,  which  makes  progress  towards 

unification so slow. 

First  of  all,  it  is  worth  considering  perhaps  one  of  the  most  important  and 

key  reasons  why  Saudi  Arabia  is  still  on  its  way  to  BRICS  and  has  not  fully 

integrated with the group. As already mentioned, this is Iran. And it's really fair to 

say this, because there are two ways globally: Iran itself is the main regional rival 

of  the  KSA,  and  also  because  of  Iran's  activity  in  the region in the framework of 

proxy  conflicts  and  the  war  in  Gaza,  the  United  States  and  Israel  are  putting 

pressure  on  the  Kingdom,  in  particular  on  the  MBS,  because  these  partners  are 

important and necessary for Riyadh as part of the IMEC project. It is worth taking 

a  closer  look  at  the  IMEC  project  itself.  IMEC  stands  for  The  India-Middle 

East-Europe Economic Corridor and is a major strategic initiative announced at the 

G20  summit  in  New  Delhi  in  2023.  According  to  White  House  Archives (2023), 

this  corridor  is  conceived  as  a  large-scale  multimodal  infrastructure  project  that 

aims  to  connect  India  with  Europe  through the Middle East, in particular through 

Saudi  Arabia,  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  Jordan  and  Israel.  The  essence  of  this 

corridor  is  an  advanced  infrastructure  that  consists  of  a  network  of  railways,  sea 

 
78 

routes,  energy  pipelines  and  digital  infrastructure  designed  to  improve  the 

movement  of  goods,  energy  and  data  between  key  regions  (Europe,  the  Middle 

East and Asia). In the FACT SHEET on the page White House Archives (2023), it 

is  also  noted  that  the  United  States  emphasizes  its  “unwavering  commitment”  to 

make  important  regional  economic  investments,  as  well  as  the  importance  of 

creating  and  promoting  this  initiative  together  with  partners.  It  turns  out  that 

Washington  is  going  to  act  as  one  of  the  leading  financial  and  investment  forces 

within  the  framework  of  this  initiative.  As  noted  earlier  in  one  of  the  previous 

sub-chapters, economic difficulties and lack of funding for major vital projects are 

taking  place in the KSA, and this initiative is no exception. Saudi Arabia urgently 

needs  a  close  partnership  with  the  United  States  to  implement  this  project,  so 

American  pressure  is  taking  on  a  completely  different  degree  and  is  hindering 

Riyadh's entry into BRICS.  

And why is this project so important for the KSA? It can be discussed about 

the serious strategic and economic importance of this initiative for the country and, 

of  course,  for  MBS,  who strives for settlement and ambitious projects that should 

seriously  strengthen  the  country  and  him  as  the  future  king.  Firstly,  IMEC 

positions  and  includes  the  Kingdom  as  the  most  important  logistics  hub  between 

Asia,  the  Middle  East  and  Europe  (this  so-called  “route"  connecting  the 

continents).  By  doing  this,  Saudi  Arabia  can  become  and  strive  to  become  an 

important  transit  point  for  the  flow  of  goods  and  energy  resources.  In  turn,  this 

approach  contributes  to  Saudi  Arabia's desire to diversify its economy, which is a 

key  goal  of  the  Vision  2030  plan.  The  Kingdom  is  committed  to  generating 

economic  benefits  from  this  initiative.  Secondly,  the  IMEC  project  can  also 

provide the KSA with an opportunity to strengthen political and economic ties with 

major  global players. It is worth noting India, the European Union and the United 

States.  These  players  are the most important forces and important partners for the 

Kingdom  itself  and  MBS.  Active  participation  in  IMEC  initiatives  helps  to 

strengthen the image of Riyadh as a key regional player and a modernizing force in 

the  Middle  East,  and  MBS  as  a  successful  reformer.  Taking  advantage  of  its 

 
79 

traditional  alliance  with  the  United  States  while  strengthening  relations  with 

emerging  Asian  powers  as  well  as  Europe.  Of  course,  we  can  note  the  fact  that 

Saudi Arabia is striving to strengthen itself as a major player in the energy market. 

The corridor's construction plans include the transportation of clean energy, such as 

hydrogen,  from  the  Middle  East  to  Europe.  This,  in  turn,  could  provide  Riyadh 

with  a  new  export  market  for  its  future  green  energy  projects  (which  is  also 

included  in  the  Vision  2030  plan). It turns out that for Saudi Arabia, IMEC is not 

just a logistical project, but rather a great opportunity to gain a solid foundation for 

its  broader  ambitions  for  economic  diversification,  regional  leadership,  and 

strategic autonomy on the global stage. 

Iran  plays  an  important  role  here  and  is  also  indirectly  involved  in  the 

“chain”  of  facts  that  prevent  the  Kingdom  from  implementing  the  IMEC  project 

and  the  ambitious  initiatives  of MBS. Iran is acting as a regional rival for Riyadh 

even though diplomatic relations will be restored in 2023. Iran is one of the driving 

forces  behind  the  Houthis  in  Yemen,  with  Saudi  Arabia  on  the  other  side  of  the 

conflict.  This  proxy  conflict  has  caused  a  lot  of  difficulties  and  problems  for  the 

Kingdom  and  is also an example of Mohammed bin Salman's less than successful 

foreign  policy.  Moreover,  the  Houthis  are  opposed  to  the  United  States  and  its 

presence  in  the  region.  They  attack  American  ships,  as  Al  Jazeera  reported  in 

January 2024, when a missile attack was carried out on ships. And US support for 

Israel  in  the  war  in  the  Gaza  Strip also makes Washington a serious opponent for 

Tehran.  Saudi  Arabia  relies  on  the  rhetoric of the United States and its support in 

these  conflicts.  Moreover,  the  support  of  Israel  and  Washington  is  extremely 

important  in  the  implementation  of  the  IMEC  project,  which  is  vital  for  both the 

KSA  and  MBS.  Conducting  a  dialogue  with  Israel  (Iran's  main  opponent  in  the 

crisis  in  the  Middle  East)  is  necessary  to  promote  the  very  existence  of  The 

India-Middle  East-Europe  Economic  Corridor.  And  the  war  that  Israel  (and  even 

the  United States) is involved in is slowing down construction. In confirmation of 

the  rhetoric  against  Iran  by  MBS,  Ottoway  (2021)  writes  in  his  book,  where  he 

notes  that  the  Crown  Prince  positions  himself  as  a  regional  bulwark  against  Iran 

 
80 

and  Islamism,  and  also emphasizes that the creation of an anti-Iranian coalition is 

central  to  his  foreign  policy  narrative.  Of course, the book was written before the 

restoration  of  diplomatic  relations  and  the  path  to  normalization  between  the 

countries,  but  in  connection  with  the  above-mentioned  foreign  policy  initiatives, 

the rhetoric against Iran is gaining momentum again. As for the place of BRICS in 

this  issue,  the  anti-Iranian  rhetoric  from  the  United  States  and  Israel  (IMEC 

partners)  has  a  serious  impact  and  leads  to  pressure  on  Saudi  Arabia,  since 

Washington and Jerusalem probably do not want to see the KSA in the same union 

with Iran (which is BRICS). It is very important for Prince Mohammed bin Salman 

to have the investment power and support from the United States, including Israel, 

in  order  to  implement  and  follow  projects  (such  as Vision 2030 and IMEC). And 

the  Kingdom's  official  membership  in  BRICS  could  undermine  these  important 

ties. Moreover, in confirmation of the strong rhetoric against Iran, one can cite the 

fact that after Trump's re-election as president of the United States, he introduced a 

policy of "maximum pressure" on Tehran, as reported by RT (2025). And besides, 

Trump  does  not  treat  BRICS  in  the  best  way,  in  particular  because  of  their 

aspirations  to  create  their  own  currency  that  could  replace  the  American  dollar. 

That  is  why  sudden  movements  on  the  part  of  Saudi  Arabia  towards  BRICS  can 

lead  to  serious  consequences  –  the  United  States  may  simply  withdraw  from  the 

IMEC project or create conditions for pressure on Riyadh. 

Additionally,  it's  worth  noting  very  briefly  that  Saudi  Arabia  still  relies 

heavily  on  weapons  that  the  United  States  buys.  America  acts  as  the  Kingdom's 

main  defense  partner,  as  well  as  a  kind  of  guarantor  of  the  security  of  the  KSA. 

Major  BRICS  members  such  as  Russia  and  China  probably  do  not  have  much 

desire,  and  more  importantly,  the  ability,  to  replace  the  United  States  for  Saudi 

Arabia  and  become  new  guarantors.  Therefore,  this  fact  again  works  in 

Washington's  favor,  which  can  thereby  exert  influence  and pressure, including on 

joining BRICS. 

Summing  up,  the  importance  of  the  IMEC  project  for  Saudi  Arabia  is 

extremely  high,  and  it  is  expected  that  this  particular  initiative  can  bring  more 

 
81 

tangible  and  significant  benefits  to  the  KSA than membership in BRICS. This, in 

turn, largely determines and provides an answer to why the Kingdom continues to 

delay  joining  the  group.  Israel  and  the  United  States  can  largely  provide  their 

geo-economic  support,  as  well  as  financing  for  the  IMEC  project,  and  in  this 

situation  this  can  act  as  “levers”  of  pressure  on  Riyadh  not  to  join  BRICS. 

Moreover, these ways of pressure may not be so direct and obvious, but MBS and 

political representatives of Saudi Arabia are trying to sensibly assess the risks and 

severity  of  the  consequences  of  joining  BRICS.  But  it  is  important  to  note  that 

nevertheless,  the  Kingdom does not reject full entry and deep integration with the 

union,  because  if  an  approach  with  proper  maneuvering  and  balance  is  followed, 

the KSA can continue to take advantage of both its Western partnerships (including 

with Israel) and Eastern actors (BRICS, namely Russia, China and India). 

4.4 Conclusion On the Chapter 

As  part  of  the  general  conclusion  of  this  chapter,  it  is  worth  noting  the 

existing  logical  relationship  and  interdependence  between  domestic  and  foreign 

policy  factors  that  are behind the idea of joining BRICS and stopping the country 

from  fully  joining  the  group  at  the  moment.  The  domestic  political  aspect  lies in 

the unstable and difficult-to-predict environment that has been created by a serious 

political  struggle  on  the  part  of  Mohammed  bin  Salman  in  his  quest  to  become 

Crown  Prince  instead  MBN.  This  formed  a  certain  attitude  towards  his  figure on 

the  part  of  the  elite  and  the  traditional  establishment  of  the  Kingdom.  And  his 

chosen path of serious reforms and ambitious projects is explained by an attempt to 

strengthen his own support by gaining support from modern society (mainly young 

people and women) in order to strengthen himself in the future as the future king of 

the  country,  earning  “points"  in  his  favor.  However,  the  difficult  financial  and 

economic  situation,  especially  with  the  financing  of  vital mega-projects, makes it 

extremely  difficult  to act exclusively at the internal level. Therefore, MBS is very 

much focused on the inside, as it can seek support there and gain so-called “points" 

there,  including  through  participation  in  BRICS  as  a  successful  policy.  As  for 

 
82 

foreign  policy  factors  as  drivers  towards  BRICS,  it  is  worth  noting  the  existing 

pattern  of  following  the policy of the neighboring UAE state under the leadership 

of  MBZ,  which  had  previously  greatly  helped  MBS  rise,  and  the  first  successful 

initiatives of the Saudi prince in foreign policy were made under the leadership and 

with the help of Mohammed bin Zayed. Moreover, we should not forget about the 

existing confrontation and rivalries between these states. And therefore, when Abu 

Dhabi  successfully  and  fully  joined  BRICS,  this  most  likely  served  as  an  excuse 

and  a “wake-up call” for MBS to follow MBZ's example in order to keep up with 

its  rival.  As  well  as  the  orientation  towards  the  foreign  policy  decisions  of  its 

neighbor,  this  step  was  also  likely  influenced.  An  important  point  at  the  external 

level  is  also  an  attempt  to  exert  some  pressure  on  the  United  States,  a  long-time 

ally and partner of the KSA, in order to strengthen partnerships and advantages on 

their  part,  since  Saudi  Arabia's  entry  into  BRICS  clearly  does  not  follow 

Washington's  goal  of  preserving  its  important  partner,  through  which  America  is 

increasing its influence in the Middle East. Finally, as an answer to the question of 

Saudi Arabia's delayed accession to BRICS, we can conclude that the United States 

and  Israel  have  significant  influence  on  this  issue,  because  Iran  is  present  in  the 

association – an opponent and rival of Jerusalem in the region, as well as a country 

that  Washington  exerts  pressure  on  in  every  possible  way.  Both  of  these  actors 

probably  would  not  like  to  see  Riyadh  together  with  Tehran  in  the  framework of 

BRICS.  And  the  financial  support  from  the  United  States  and  the  Israeli 

contribution to the IMEC project are very important for Saudi Arabia to implement 

this very IMEC corridor as soon as possible, which is clearly in the interests of the 

IBS for the implementation of its projects and reforms (such as Vision 2030). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion 

83 

In conclusion, this research should summarize the results of the work carried 

out in the framework of studying the impact of Saudi Arabia's accession to BRICS 

on  its  foreign  policy.  Moreover,  at  this  final  stage,  the  answer  to  the  research 

question  posed  will  be  considered  and  the  hypothesis  proposed  at  the  beginning 

will be evaluated. 

To begin with, this paper provides a comprehensive analysis of the potential 

implications of Saudi Arabia's entry into BRICS for its foreign policy. The aspects 

that motivate the country to join the association were described and studied, and as 

a  result,  these  factors  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  foreign  policy  of  the  KSA.  As 

well  as  the  opposite  aspects,  which  to  a  large extent hinder and slow down entry, 

having negative or drastic changes in Riyadh's foreign policy.  

The  work  began  with  the  first  important  chapter,  which  examined  and  laid 

the  theoretical  foundation  by  examining  the  nature  of  international  organizations 

and  the  unique  characteristics  of  BRICS  as  a  multilateral platform. Although this 

platform is not an international organization with a clear charter and system (as are 

the  G7  and  G20,  by  the  way),  it  is  still  actively  gaining  momentum  through  its 

growth.  This  growing  force  cannot  be  ignored  in  the  context  of  global  dynamics 

and  international  relations  in  general.  Rather,  BRICS  is  a  hybrid  and  informal 

association  that  promotes  cooperation  between  the  countries  of  the  Global  South 

and at the same time serves as a counterweight to the global governance structures 

led  by  the  United  States.  It  should  be  noted  that  BRICS  functions  not  just  as  a 

coalition  of  emerging  economies,  but  also as a symbol of an emerging alternative 

world  order  that  challenges  the  dominance  of traditional Western institutions. For 

Saudi  Arabia,  BRICS  itself  is  presented  as  a  new  horizon  of  opportunities  that 

would  contribute  to  the country's internal and external aspirations. Therefore, it is 

not surprising that at one time the Kingdom expressed a desire to participate in the 

association  as  a  full  member,  as  a  result  of  which  it  received  an  invitation  there. 

However,  at  the  time  of  writing  this  paper,  Riyadh  is  still  at  the  stage  of 

 
84 

considering an invitation to BRICS and is not a full-fledged member. The situation 

itself  is  very  interesting,  especially  in  terms  of  the  impact  of  joining  and 

participating  in  BRICS  on  Saudi  Arabia's  foreign  policy,  which is why this study 

was conducted. 

Due attention was paid to the immediate facts that, to one degree or another, 

motivate the KSA to fully join BRICS and, as a result, receive these very benefits. 

A  focused  study  of  Saudi  Arabia's  motives  for entering into BRICS structure and 

the practical benefits it expects has formed an important understanding of why the 

country  still  wants  to  integrate  and  not  lose  touch  with  the  association.  These 

factors  are  directly  related  to  the  Kingdom's  foreign  policy  ambitions,  which 

consist in the devertification of its alliances and partnerships on the global stage by 

carefully balancing between the West (the traditional ally of the United States) and 

the East, as well as its own national geopolitical interests, which the country and its 

leadership  as  a  whole  pursue.  BRICS can become an important strategic platform 

for  advanced  foreign  policy  on  the  part  of  the  KSA,  as  this platform can provide 

extensive  and  flexible  opportunities  for  the  formation  and  conclusion  of 

multilateral partnerships with member countries, which can certainly influence the 

course  of  Riyadh's  foreign  policy.  And,  of  course,  serious  and  sometimes  critical 

issues  that  could  hinder  Saudi  Arabia's  full  integration  with  BRICS  were 

considered.  If  we  note  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  external  level,  that  is,  the 

foreign  policy  on  the  part  of  Riyadh,  then  it  is  worth  saying  that  the  path  of 

balancing is not as simple and obvious as it seems. The Kingdom is not interested 

(and  to  some  extent  cannot  even completely) get rid of its major Western partner, 

the United States. There is a significant unilateral dependence that has been formed 

through  large-scale  investments  from  Washington  (and  vice  versa),  as well as the 

need  for  further  financing  of  large  and  vital  projects  for  Saudi  Arabia,  such  as 

initiatives  within  the  framework  of  Vision  2030  and,  of  course,  such  significant 

foreign  policy  projects  as  IMEC,  which is directly related to the country's growth 

on the global stage. It also has an impact on relations with key forces in the Middle 

East region (such as Israel and Iran). Moreover, strong and lasting cooperation with 

 
85 

the United States has been noted in the field of defense and security, perhaps one of 

the  key  points  on  which  Saudi  Arabia  wants  to  continue  cooperation,  has  its 

significant pressure on the Kingdom within the framework of its foreign policy. 

Finally,  in  addition,  two  key  levels  in  the  KSA  were  considered,  which 

largely determine the movement towards BRICS – the internal and external levels. 

At both levels, the influential figure of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman is in 

many ways the driving force behind both the country's domestic and foreign policy. 

The search for legitimacy and strengthening of his own figure within the Kingdom 

as  a  likely  future  king  led  MBS  to  large-scale  internal  reforms,  which  caused 

contradictory  sentiments  in  the  country.  His  very  rise  to  power  created  a  tense 

environment inside, which, among other things, forced MBS to focus his attention 

as  much  as  possible  on  the  external  level  –  the  level  of  Saudi  Arabia's  foreign 

policy.  The  Kingdom's  application  to  join  BRICS  and  the  movement  towards 

unification itself can be interpreted not only as a geopolitical maneuver, but also as 

a strategic tool to strengthen the international authority of the Crown Prince and his 

political  capital  in  the  face  of  internal  economic  tensions  and  elite  confrontation. 

All  of  this  has  a  direct  impact  on  the  foreign  policy  of  the  entire  Kingdom, 

including in the framework of considering the country in the BRICS structure. The 

comparison with the UAE's more assertive and independent foreign policy with its 

president 

largely  underscores  the  importance  of  BRICS  as  a  diplomatic 

counterweight  and  a  means  of  regional  influence  that  both  countries  are  fighting 

for.  

Answering  the  research  question  posed  and at the same time evaluating the 

established  hypothesis,  it  should  be  said  that  Saudi  Arabia's  accession  to  BRICS 

can significantly affect the course of its foreign policy, as well as directly affect its 

relations with key forces in the Middle East region. A number of countries affected 

in this study – the UAE, Iran and Israel - are behind these forces. From the UAE's 

point of view, it is important to note the nature of the competition for influence in 

the region, as well as the growth of strong sovereign states. Abu Dhabi is already a 

full-fledged BRICS member, which allows it to have some advantage over its rival, 

 
86 

and  Saudi  Arabia's  full  participation  there  will  probably  even  their  chances, 

entrenching rivalry and forcing both countries to seek to extract as much benefit as 

possible through an agenda of unification and group initiatives. The situation with 

Israel  is  quite  clear  –  it  does  not  accept  Saudi  Arabia's presence in BRICS, since 

Iran is present there. Iran is a key rival and opponent of Jerusalem, and the United 

States, against the background of its allied ties with Israel and Trump's policies, is 

clearly  in  a  similar position. The KSA's entry into the association is not explicitly 

encouraged  by  Israel  and  Washington,  which  are very important and key partners 

on  which  the  implementation  of  the  IMEC  project  (one  of  the  key  ones  for 

Riyadh's  foreign  policy  success  and  growth)  depends.  In  many  ways,  these  two 

countries  (the  United  States  and  Israel)  act  as  factors  and  reasons  why  Saudi 

Arabia  is  still  hesitating  to  join  BRICS.  Both  of  these  states  do  not  accept  the 

Kingdom's  presence  within the framework of the association, since Iran is present 

there.  Financial  support  and  heavy  dependence  from  the  point  of  view  of  mutual 

investments with the United States complicate and slow down the process of Saudi 

Arabia's  accession.  Israel  in  turn  is  an  important  ally  and  partner  of  Washington, 

and  the  success  and  speed  of  the  IMEC  project  within  the  Middle  East  region 

largely depends on Jerusalem. 

It  is  also  safe  to  say  that the hypothesis posed at the beginning of the work 

has  been  proven.  After  all,  Saudi  Arabia's entry into BRICS will clearly lead to a 

significant reorientation of its foreign policy. This will be reflected in the strategic 

diversification  of  alliances  beyond  the  traditional  Western  axis  by  balancing  and 

establishing  new  contacts  with  the  BRICS  countries.  Moreover,  the  Kingdom's 

accession  will  manifest  itself  in  the  expansion  of  economic  and  political 

cooperation  with  the  member  countries  of  the  association  through  multilateral 

contracts  and  participation  in  group  initiatives that can benefit Riyadh. Moreover, 

the  accession itself will significantly affect the redistribution of regional influence 

in the Middle East, which will be reflected in mutual relations with regional actors 

(such as the UAE, Israel and Iran). And Saudi Arabia's participation in BRICS will 

also  lead  to  a  gradual  reconfiguration  in  the  field  of  security  and  financial 

 
dependencies,  while  balancing  existing  partnerships,  especially  with  the  United 

87 

States. 

Taken  together,  the  results  of  this  study  indicate  that  Saudi  Arabia's 

integration into BRICS is both a reflection and a catalyst for a change in its foreign 

policy  identity  and  vector  in  general.  This  indicates  a  departure  from  the 

Kingdom's  historically  Western-oriented  diplomacy  towards  a  more  autonomous, 

multidirectional  and  pragmatic  approach  to  international  affairs.  Although 

full-fledged  membership  in  BRICS  has  not  yet  taken  place, the Kingdom's active 

interaction  with  the  association  already  indicates  a  desire  not  to  lose  this 

opportunity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Reference List / Bibliography 

88 

Abdelaziz  Abdeldayem,  F.M.  and  Wadie  Kswat,  S.F.  (2024).  "BRICS 

expansion  in  the  news  coverage  of  member  countries:  a  political  economy 

perspective",  Journal  of  Humanities  and  Applied  Social  Sciences,  Vol. 

ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print. 

AIM  Congress.  (n.d.).  Annual  Investment  Meeting  2024.  Retrieved  from 

https://aimcongress.com/ 

Aleksandra  Rabczun  (2024).  Perspective  of  Arabian  Members  of 

BRICS—New Possibilities Thanks to Expansion 

Alhasan,  H., Hammad, N., & Alajlouni, L. (2023). With the expansion of 

BRICS, China and Middle Eastern powers are drawing closer. 

Al  Jazeera.  (2021,  February  26).  MBS  approved  operation  to  capture  or 

kill 

Khashoggi: 

US 

report. 

Al 

Jazeera. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/2/26/mbs-oversaw-saudi-killers-of-khashog

gi-us-intel-report 

Al  Jazeera.  (2022,  December  6).  China’s  Xi  arrives  in  Saudi  Arabia  to 

‘bolster 

ties’. 

Al 

Jazeera. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/12/6/chinas-xi-to-visit-saudi-arabia-from-we

dnesday 

Al  Jazeera.  (2024,  January  15).  Yemen’s  Houthis  hit  US-owned  ship  in 

missile 

attack, 

US 

military 

says. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/1/15/yemens-houthis-hit-us-owned-ship-in-

missile-attack-us-military-says 

Anghel,  V.,  &  Jones,  E.  (2024).  The  enlargement  of  international 

organisations. 

West 

European 

Politics, 

48(1), 

1–28. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/01402382.2024.2311044 

Antonios  Valamontes  Editor  John  Karantonis  (2024).  The  Upcoming 

BRICS  Summit:  Saudi  Arabia's  Potential  Membership  and  Global  Economic 

Implications. 

 
89 

Arab  News.  (2018,  June  10).  FaceOf:  Turki  Al-Alshaikh,  Saudi  General 

Sports 

Authority 

chairman. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.arabnews.com/node/1319266/saudi-arabia 

Arab News. (2024, October 24). Saudi foreign minister commits to BRICS 

cooperation 

at 

Kazan 

summit. 

Arab 

News. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.arabnews.com/node/2576648/saudi-arabia 

Artner,  A.,  &  Yin,  Z.  (2023).  Towards  a  non-hegemonic  world  order  – 

emancipation  and  the  political  agency  of  the  Global  South  in  a  changing  world 

order. 

Third 

World 

Quarterly, 

44(10), 

2193–2207. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2023.2251422 

Asia Times. (2025, February 5). Trump gives Saudi Arabia cause to pause 

joining 

BRICS. 

Asia 

Times. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://asiatimes.com/2025/02/trump-gives-saudi-arabia-cause-to-pause-joining-bri

cs/ 

Barbary,  M.M.  (2024).  The  Impact  of  Saudi  Arabia’s  Accession  to  the 

Brics  Bloc  on  the  Performance  of  Saudi  Exports.  ECONOMICS,  2023,  Sciendo, 

vol. 0 no. 0 

Barkin,  J.  S.  (2023).  International  Organization.  Theories  and  Institutions. 

Third Edition. New York. 

Bavier, J. (2023). BRICS expansion hopefuls seek to rebalance world order. 

BBC  News.  (2017,  October  25).  Crown  prince  says  Saudis  want  return  to 

moderate 

Islam. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-41747476 

Belt  and  Road  Portal.  (2024,  January  10).  BRICS  countries  strengthen 

cooperation  through  close  economic  and  trade  exchanges.  Belt  and  Road  Portal. 

Retrieved from https://eng.yidaiyilu.gov.cn/p/06VN7335.html 

Bloomberg. (2016, April 21). The $2 Trillion Project to Get Saudi Arabia’s 

Economy 

Off 

Oil. 

Bloomberg. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2016-04-21/the-2-trillion-project-to-get

-saudi-arabia-s-economy-off-oil 

 
90 

Bloomberg. (2023, January 17). Saudi Arabia Says Open to Settling Trade 

in 

Other 

Currencies. 

Bloomberg. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-01-17/saudi-arabia-open-to-talks-

on-trade-in-currencies-besides-dollar 

Bloomberg. (2023, May 10). South Africa urges careful debate on option of 

introducing  BRICS 

common 

currency.  Bloomberg.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-05-10/south-africa-urges-careful-d

ebate-on-option-of-introducing-brics-common-currency 

Bloomberg. (2025, January 7). Saudi Arabia Starts 2025 With a $12 Billion 

Bond 

and 

PIF 

Loan. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-01-06/saudi-arabia-plans-37-billio

n-borrowing-spree-to-pay-for-huge-projects 

Borshchevskaya,  A.  (2024).  How  the  Middle  East  Became  an  Arena  for 

Putin’s Power Struggle with the US.  

Boston  Consulting  Group.  (2024,  March).  An  Evolving  BRICS  and  the 

Shifting 

World 

Order. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2024/brics-enlargement-and-shifting-world-orde

r?utm_source=chatgpt.com 

BRICS. 

(n.d.). 

History 

of 

BRICS. 

Retrieved 

from 

- 

https://infobrics.org/page/history-of-brics/ 

BRICS 

2023. 

(n.d.).  Evolution 

of  BRICS.  Retrieved 

from 

https://brics2023.gov.za/evolution-of-brics/ 

BRICS  Russia.  (2024).  Yuriy  Ushakov:  BRICS  na  dele  vyrazhaet  interesy 

mirovogo  bolshinstva.  “Yuri  Ushakov:  BRICS  actually  expresses  the  interests  of 

the 

global 

majority”. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://brics-russia2024.ru/interview/yuriy-ushakov-briks-na-dele-vyrazhaet-interes

y-mirovogo-bolshinstva/?sphrase_id=42052 

BRICS  Trade  Ministers.  (2024,  July  10).  Joint  Communiqué  of  the  14th 

BRICS 

Trade 

Ministers 

Meeting. 

Retrieved 

from 

 
91 

https://cdn.brics-russia2024.ru/upload/docs/JOINT_COMMUNIQUE_OF_THE_1

4TH_BRICS_TRADE_MINISTERS_MEETING.pdf?1724688970432977 

Buenos  Aires  Times.  (2023,  August  24).  Argentina’s  BRICS  membership 

in  doubt  as  opposition  rejects  move.  Buenos  Aires  Times.  Retrieved  from 

https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/argentina/argentinas-brics-membership-in-doubt

-as-opposition-rejects-move.phtml 

Butt,  J.  S.  (2024).  From  Dollar  Dependency  to  BRICS  Autonomy:  Legal 

and Economic Impacts on Global Trade Governance. Acta Universitatis Danubius. 

Œconomica, 20(6). 

Carnegie  Endowment  for  International  Peace.  (2024,  October).  BRICS 

Expansion, 

the  G20,  and 

the  Future  of  World  Order.  Retrieved  from  

https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/10/brics-summit-emerging-middle-p

owers-g7-g20?utm_source=chatgpt.com&lang=en 

Castro, A. (2013). The BRICS as a Coalition: Analysing the Cooperation of 

Brazil,  Russia,  India, China, and South Africa in the International Monetary Fund 

and the G-20. 

Channel News Asia. (2024, October 24). Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam and 

Thailand become partner countries of BRICS. Channel News Asia. Retrieved from 

https://www.channelnewsasia.com/asia/malaysia-indonesia-vietnam-thailand-brics-

asean-global-south-russia-china-4699841 

CNBC.  (2020,  September  23).  President  Xi  tells  UN  that  China  will  be 

‘carbon 

neutral’  within 

four 

decades.  CNBC.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.cnbc.com/2020/09/23/china-claims-it-will-be-carbon-neutral-by-the-y

ear-2060.html 

CNN.  (2020,  March  8).  Oil  crashes  by  most  since  1991  as  Saudi  Arabia 

launches 

price 

war. 

CNN 

Business. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://edition.cnn.com/2020/03/08/investing/oil-prices-crash-opec-russia-saudi-ara

bia/index.html 

 
92 

Curtis,  J.  (2024).  The  BRICS  group:  Overview  and  recent  expansion 

(Research  Briefing  No.  10136).  House  of  Commons  Library.  Retrieved  from 

https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/sn03207/ 

da Costa, S. J. A., & Sattler, T. (2020). Are we going towards a Multipolar 

World Order? An analysis of BRICS and Regional Organizations. 

Davidson,  C.  M.  (n.d.).  MOHAMMED  BIN  SALMAN  AL  SAUD  (AKA 

“MBS”). Dictators and Autocrats, 319. 

Debre,  M.,  &  Dijkstra,  H.  (2023).  Are  international  organisations  in 

decline?  An  absolute  and  relative  perspective  on  institutional  change.  Global 

Policy, 14(1), 16-30. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.13170 

Dr.  Abdulaziz  Sager  (2024).  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia:Emerging  Middle 

Power in Global Dynamics 

El  Cronista.  (2023,  November  30).  Diana  Mondino  confirmó  que  la 

Argentina  no 

ingresará  a 

los  BRICS.  El  Cronista.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.cronista.com/economia-politica/diana-mondino-confirmo-que-la-arge

ntina-no-ingresara-a-los-brics/ 

Energy  Intelligence.  (2023).  Q&A:  Saudi  Energy  Minister  Highlights  Oil 

Market 

Risks. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.energyintel.com/00000186-e11b-d0fe-a7ae-e51ffa6a0000 

European  Foundation  for  South  Asian  Studies.  (2023).  The  BRICS  | 

Origins, 

Evolution 

& 

2023 

Expansion. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.efsas.org/publications/study-papers/the-brics-origins-evolution-and-ex

pansion/ 

European  Foundation  for  South  Asian  Studies  (EFSAS)  (2023).  The 

BRICS | Origins, Evolution & 2023 Expansion. 

Folha  de  S.Paulo.  (2024,  October  23).  Brazil  Blocks  Caracas'  Bid to Join 

BRICS 

as 

a 

New 

Partner 

Country. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/internacional/en/world/2024/10/brazil-blocks-carac

as-bid-to-join-brics-as-a-new-partner-country.shtml 

 
93 

Forbes.  (2017,  May  20).  Blackstone  Unveils  $40  Billion  Infrastructure 

Mega  Fund  With  Saudi  Arabia  As  Trump  Visits.  Forbes.  Retrieved  from 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/antoinegara/2017/05/20/blackstone-unveils-40-billio

n-infrastructure-mega-fund-with-saudi-arabia-as-trump-visits/#3d44b92267ad 

Foreign  Policy.  (2023,  November  2).  Why  the  Global  South  Is  Accusing 

America 

of 

Hypocrisy. 

Foreign 

Policy. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/11/02/israel-palestine-hamas-gaza-war-russia-ukrai

ne-occupation-west-hypocrisy/ 

Gavrilenko,  V.,  &  Shenshin, V. (2024). BRICS Expansion: A Geopolitical 

Triumph of Partner Countries. BRICS Law Journal, 11(3), 9-53. 

Gjevori,  E.  (2023). How Brics is looking to challenge the Western order in 

the Middle East.  

Government  of  Saudi  Arabia.  (n.d.).  Saudi  Vision  2030.  Retrieved  from 

https://www.vision2030.gov.sa/en 

Haas,  E.  B.  (2024).  Beyond 

the  nation-state:  Functionalism  and 

international organization. ECPR Press. 

Hana  Al-Khamri.  (2020,  March  10).  MBS  and  the  Saudi  crisis  of 

legitimacy. 

Al 

Jazeera. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2020/3/10/mbs-and-the-saudi-crisis-of-legitim

acy 

Holtzmann, D. H.-D. (2024). BRICS enlargement - a “non-event” or a stage 

victory against the West? 

Hope,  B.,  &  Scheck,  J.  (2020).  Blood  and  Oil:  Mohammed  bin  Salman's 

Ruthless Quest for Global Power. Hachette UK. 

Huntington,  S.  P.  (1968).  Political  order  in  changing  societies  (pp. 

177–189). Yale University Press. 

InfoBRICS.  (2025,  February  18).  BRICS  membership  offers  global  South 

investment 

alternatives. 

InfoBRICS. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://infobrics.org/post/43473 

 
94 

International  Monetary  Fund.  (n.d.).  Currency  Composition  of  Official 

Foreign  Exchange  Reserves  (COFER)  [Dataset].  IMF  Data.  Retrieved  from 

https://data.imf.org/en/Data-Explorer?datasetUrn=IMF.STA:COFER(7.0.0) 

Jr,  R.  P.  B.  (2024).  Can  the  expanded  BRICS  pave  a  new  path  in  global 

development? 

Kamin,  K.,  &  Langhammer,  R.  J.  (2024).  BRICS+:  a  Wake-Up  Call  for 

the G7?. Cuadernos Económicos de ICE, (107), 133-145. 

Kamin, K., & Langhammer, R. J. (2024). From BRICS to BRICS+: Sheer 

More Members is not a Challenge to G7. The Economists’ Voice, 20(2), 259-265. 

Katz, M. N. (2023). The BRICS Come to the Middle East and North Africa 

Katz,  M.  N.  (2024).  The  Geopolitical  (In)  Significance  of  BRICS 

Enlargement 

Keohane,  R.  O.  (1984).  After  hegemony:  Cooperation  and  discord  in  the 

world political economy. Princeton University Press. 

Konyshev,  V., & Sergunin, A. (2022). Theoretical Perspectives on BRICS: 

What  Kind  of  an  International  Institution  Is  It?.  In  Turning  Points  of  World 

Transformation:  New  Trends,  Challenges  and  Actors  (pp.  101-115).  Singapore: 

Springer Nature Singapore. 

Kremlin.  (2009, June 16). First BRIC summit took place in Yekaterinburg. 

Retrieved from http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/4478 

Kremlin.  (2024,  October  24).  News  conference  following  16th  BRICS 

Summit. Retrieved from http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/75385 

Lee,  B.  T.  F.,  &  Sims, J. P. (2024). The BRICS+ Expansion, Global Trade 

Dynamics,  and  the Dedollarization Phenomenon. Unnes Political Science Journal, 

8(1), 19-29. 

Lissovolik  Yaroslav  (2024).  BRICS  expansion:  new  geographies  and 

spheres of cooperation 

Logan  Cochrane  &  Esmat  Zaidan  (2024).  Shifting  global  dynamics:  an 

empirical  analysis  of  BRICS  +  expansion  and  its  economic,  trade,  and  military 

 
95 

implications in the context of the G7, Cogent Social Sciences, 10:1, 2333422, DOI: 

10.1080/23311886.2024.2333422 

Maaal.  (2023,  June  5). 

ﺲﻜﯾﺮﺑ“

ﺔﻋﻮﻤﺠﻤﻟ

مﺎﻤﻀﻧﻻا

تﺎﯿﺒﻠﺳو

تﺎﯿﺑﺎﺠﯾإ

".  “Pros  and 

cons 

of 

joining 

the 

“BRICS”group”.  Maaal. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://maaal.com/2023/06/ﺮﺑ-ﺔﻋﻮﻤﺠﻤﻟ-مﺎﻤﻀﻧﻻا-تﺎﯿﺒﻠﺳو-تﺎﯿﺑﺎﺠﯾإ/ 

Malik, I. Y., Kohar, H. Y., & Tungkagi, H. N. Z. (2024). BRICS expansion 

in  the  Middle  East  from  political  economy  perspective. Center of Middle Eastern 

Studies (CMES), 17(1), 77-88. 

Mearsheimer,  J.  J.  (1994).  The  false  promise  of  international  institutions. 

International Security, 19(3), 5–49. https://doi.org/10.2307/2539078 

Melvin, D. N. (2023). Building Up the BRICS: An Emerging Counter-West 

Order? 

Middle  East  Briefing.  (2023,  September  12).  Saudi  Arabia  and  BRICS: 

The  Consequences  of  Joining,  Multilateral  Trade  and  Prospects.  Middle  East 

Briefing. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.middleeastbriefing.com/news/saudi-arabia-and-brics-the-consequence

s-of-joining-multilateral-trade-and-prospects/ 

Middle  East  Monitor.  (2020,  November  4).  Saudi  takes  out  loan  to  fund 

mega-city 

projects. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20201104-saudi-takes-out-loan-to-fund-mega-

city-projects/ 

Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  Saudi  Arabia.  (2024). 

ﻦﯿﻣﺮﺤﻟا

مدﺎﺧ 

 ﻦﻋ 

ًﺔﺑﺎﯿﻧ

2024

 ﺲﻠﺑ

 ﺲﻜﯾﺮﺑ

 ﺔﻤﻗ

 ﻲﻓ

كرﺎﺸﻤﻟا

ﺔﻜﻠﻤﻤﻟا

ﺪﻓو 

 سأﺮﯾ

ﺔﯿﺟرﺎﺨﻟا

ﺮﯾزو

ﻮﻤﺳ 

..ﻦﯿﻔﯾﺮﺸﻟا

. “On behalf of 

the  custodian  of  the  Two  Holy  Mosques..  His  Highness  The  Minister  of  Foreign 

Affairs  heads  the  kingdom's  delegation  participating  in  the  BRICS  Plus  summit 

2024”. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.mofa.gov.sa/ar/ministry/statements/Pages/F557.aspx 

Ministry  of  New  and  Renewable  Energy.  (2025).  National  Green 

Hydrogen Mission. Retrieved from https://mnre.gov.in/en/hydrogen-overview/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96 

Nam, C. W. (2024). Introduction to the issue on BRICS enlargement: What 

are  the  geoeconomic  implications?.  In  EconPol  Forum  (Vol.  25,  No.  1,  pp.  3-4). 

Munich: CESifo GmbH. 

NDTV.  (2025,  February  28).  As  Trump  Boasts  "BRICS  Is  Dead",  New 

De-Dollarisation 

Call 

Comes 

As 

A 

Jolt. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.ndtv.com/world-news/as-donald-trump-boasts-brics-is-dead-new-de-d

ollarisation-call-comes-as-a-jolt-7817740 

Neill,  J.  O.  (2002).  Building  Better  Global  Economic  BRICs.  Global 

Economics Paper, (November 2001). 

New  Development  Bank.  (2022).  Agreement  on  the  New  Development 

Bank. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.ndb.int/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Agreement-on-the-New-Develop

ment-Bank.pdf 

New  Development  Bank. 

(n.d.).  About  NDB.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.ndb.int/about-ndb/ 

Organization  of  the  Petroleum  Exporting  Countries.  (2024).  Saudi 

Arabia,  Russia, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Kazakhstan, Algeria, and 

Oman 

extend 

voluntary 

cuts. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.opec.org/pr-detail/17-05-sep-2024.html 

Ottaway, D. (2021). Mohammed Bin Salman: The Icarus of Saudi Arabia?. 

Lynne Rienner Publishers, Incorporated. 

Pádraig  Carmody  (2024).  BRICS’  Enlargement:  Power  Expansion  or 

Contraction in a Changing World Order? 

Papa,  M.,  &  Han,  Z.  (2025).  The  evolution  of  soft  balancing  in  informal 

institutions: the case of BRICS. International Affairs, 101(1), 73-95. 

Peters,  M.  A.  (2022).  The  emerging multipolar world order: A preliminary 

analysis.  Educational 

Philosophy 

and  Theory, 

55(14), 

1653–1663. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2022.2151896 

Press  Information  Bureau.Government  of  India.  (2023, May 4). Raksha 

Mantri  meets  China’s  State  Councillor  &  Minister  of  National  Defence  ahead  of 

 
97 

SCO  Defence  Ministers’  meeting  in  New  Delhi.  Government  of  India.  Retrieved 

from https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1920322 

Reuters.  (2017,  November  6).  Future  Saudi  king  tightens  grip  on  power 

with 

arrests 

including 

Prince  Alwaleed.  Reuters.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-saudi-arrests/future-saudi-king-tightens-grip-on

-power-with-arrests-including-prince-alwaleed-idUSKBN1D506P/ 

Reuters. (2019, July 18). U.S. House rejects Saudi weapons sales; Trump to 

veto. 

Reuters. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-saudi-arms/house-rejects-saudi-weapons-sal

es-trump-to-veto-idUSKCN1UC2US/ 

Reuters.  (2022,  March  13).  Sanctions  have  frozen  around  $300  bln  of 

Russian 

reserves, 

FinMin 

says. 

Reuters. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/article/ukraine-crisis-russia-reserves-idUSL5N2VG0BU/ 

Reuters. (2023, December 7). Russia's Putin told Saudi's MbS: We meet in 

Moscow 

next 

time. 

Reuters. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/world/russias-putin-told-saudis-mbs-we-meet-moscow-ne

xt-time-2023-12-07/ 

Reuters.  (2024,  February  2).  Saudi  Arabia  pushes  for  U.S.  defense  pact 

ahead 

of 

presidential 

election. 

Reuters. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/saudi-arabia-pushes-us-defence-pact-a

head-presidential-election-2024-02-02/ 

Reuters.  (2024,  January  16).  Saudi  Arabia  has  not  yet  joined  BRICs  - 

minister. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/world/saudi-arabia-has-not-yet-joined-brics-minister-202

4-01-16/ 

Reuters.  (2024).  Saudi  Arabia  has  not  yet  joined  BRICS  -  Saudi  official 

source. 

Reuters.  (2025,  February  13).  Brazil  nixes  BRICS  currency,  eyes  less 

reliance 

on 

'mighty' 

dollar. 

Reuters. 

Retrieved 

from 

 
98 

https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/brazil-nixes-brics-currency-eyes-less-r

eliance-mighty-dollar-2025-02-13/ 

Reuters.  (2025,  February  13).  Trump  warns  BRICS  nations  could  face 

100% 

tariffs. 

Reuters. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/world/trump-warns-brics-nations-could-face-100-tariffs-2

025-02-13/ 

Reuters.  (2025,  January  23).  Saudi  Arabia  plans  $600  billion  in  new  US 

investment, 

trade 

over 

four 

years. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/saudi-crown-prince-seeks-600-bln-inve

stment-push-with-us-2025-01-22/ 

Reuters.  (2025,  March  31).  Percent  of  global  FX  reserves  in  dollars  ticks 

up; 

amounts 

fall 

– 

IMF 

data 

shows.  Reuters.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/percent-global-fx-reserves-dollars-tick

s-up-amounts-fall-imf-data-shows-2025-03-31/?utm_source=chatgpt.com 

RIA  Novosti.  (2025,  January  31).  V  BRICS  ne  obsyzhdayut  sozdanie 

obshchey valyuty — Peskov. “BRICS are not discussing the creation of a common 

currency, 

Peskov 

said”. 

RIA 

Novosti. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://ria.ru/20250131/peskov-1996596307.html 

RT  News.  (2025,  February  12).  Trump’s  Ukraine  envoy  calls  for 

‘maximum 

pressure’ 

on 

Tehran. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.rt.com/news/610763-trump-envoy-iran-pressure/ 

Sato,  T.  (2023).  Evolving  constitutions  of  international  organizations:  a 

critical  analysis  of  the  interpretative  framework  of  the  constituent  instruments  of 

international organizations (Vol. 3). Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. (2025). SIPRI Military 

Expenditure Database. Retrieved from https://milex.sipri.org/sipri 

TASS. (2023, August 29). Ethiopia’s accession to BRICS facilitates creation 

of 

fair 

global 

system  — 

diplomat. 

TASS. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://tass.com/world/1666913 

 
99 

TASS.  (2024,  March  5).  Interv'yu  s  predstavitelem  Rossii  v  BRICS. 

“Interview  with  the  representative  of  Russia  in  BRICS”.  TASS.  Retrieved  from 

https://tass.ru/interviews/20149675 

The  Guardian.  (2018,  November  23).  ‘Hedges  case  may  signal  UAE 

kickback against western criticism’. 

The  Guardian.  (2020,  August  31).  India  accuses  China  of  'provocative 

military  movements' 

near 

border.  The  Guardian.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/aug/31/india-accuses-china-of-provocati

ve-military-movements-near-border 

The  Independent.  (2023,  August  24).  Brics  countries  agree  historic 

expansion 

as 

six  new 

countries 

invited 

to 

join.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/brics-2023-summit-new-membe

rs-saudi-uae-iran-b2398553.html 

The  New  York  Times.  (2019,  September  14).  Two  Major  Saudi  Oil 

Installations  Hit  by  Drone  Strike,  and  U.S.  Blames  Iran.  The  New  York  Times. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/14/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-refineries-dro

ne-attack.html 

The  New  York  Times.  (2020,  January  9).  'Mohammed  bin  Zayed’s  Dark 

Vision of the Middle East’s Future'. 

The  Wall  Street  Journal.  (2025,  March  9).  What  Went  Wrong  at  Saudi 

Arabia’s  Futuristic  Metropolis  in  the  Desert.  The  Wall  Street  Journal.  Retrieved 

from https://www.wsj.com/finance/saudi-arabia-neom-sindalah-15b9f25a 

The  White  House.  (2023,  September  9).  FACT  SHEET:  World  Leaders 

Launch a Landmark India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor. Retrieved from 

https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/09/09/fact-sh

eet-world-leaders-launch-a-landmark-india-middle-east-europe-economic-corridor/ 

Trump,  D.  (2025,  January  31).  [The  idea  that  the  BRICS  Countries  are 

trying to move away from the Dollar, while we stand by and watch, is OVER. We 

are  going  to  require  a  commitment  from  these  seemingly  hostile  Countries  that 

 
100 

they  will  neither  create  a  new  BRICS  Currency,  nor  back  any  other  Currency  to 

replace  the  mighty  U.S.  Dollar  or, they will face 100% Tariffs, and should expect 

to  say  goodbye  to  selling  into  the  wonderful  U.S.  Economy.  They  can  go  find 

another sucker Nation. There is no chance that BRICS will replace the U.S. Dollar 

in  International  Trade,  or  anywhere  else,  and  any  Country  that  tries  should  say 

hello  to  Tariffs,  and  goodbye  to  America!]  [Post].  Truth  Social.  Retrieved  from 

https://truthsocial.com/@realDonaldTrump/posts/113920366067218393 

Trump, D. [@realDonaldTrump]. (2024, Decemberl 1). [The idea that the 

BRICS Countries are trying to move away from the Dollar while we stand by and 

watch  is  OVER.  We  require  a  commitment  from  these  Countries  that  they  will 

neither  create a new BRICS Currency, nor back any other Currency to replace the 

mighty  U.S.  Dollar  or,  they  will  face  100%  Tariffs,  and  should  expect  to  say 

goodbye  to  selling  into  the  wonderful  U.S.  Economy.  They  can  go  find  another 

“sucker!”  There  is  no  chance  that  the  BRICS  will  replace  the  U.S.  Dollar  in 

International Trade, and any Country that tries should wave goodbye to America.] 

[Tweet]. 

X. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://x.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1863009545858998512 

TV  BRICS.  (2023,  August  24).  Yuar  i  Saudovskaya  Araviya  Uvelichat 

Obemy  Dvustoronney  Torgovli  i  Investitsiy.  “South  Africa  and  Saudi  Arabia  to 

increase  bilateral 

trade  and 

investment”.  TV  BRICS.  Retrieved 

from 

https://tvbrics.com/news/yuar-i-saudovskaya-araviya-uvelichat-obemy-dvustoronn

ey-torgovli-i-investitsiy/ 

TV  BRICS.  (2024,  May  13).  Annual  Investment  Congress  in  UAE 

discusses  impact  of  BRICS  countries  on  global  economy.  TV  BRICS.  Retrieved 

from 

https://tvbrics.com/en/news/annual-investment-congress-in-uae-discusses-impact-o

f-brics-countries-on-global-economy/?sphrase_id=10899 

TV  BRICS.  (2024,  November 29). Investment opportunities of the BRICS 

countries. 

TV 

BRICS. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://tvbrics.com/en/news/investment-opportunities-of-the-brics-countries/ 

 
101 

U.S. Department of State. (1933). Memorandum of Conversation: Ibn Saud 

and  U.S.  Interests.  In  Foreign  Relations  of  the  United  States,  1933,  Volume  II. 

Retrieved from https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1933v02/d756 

U.S.  Department  of  State. (2025, January 20). U.S. Security Cooperation 

With 

Saudi 

Arabia. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.state.gov/u-s-security-cooperation-with-saudi-arabia/ 

UBS.  (2024,  December  2).  Why  the  US-dollar-centric  world  is  likely  to 

continue 

for 

years 

to 

come. 

UBS. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.ubs.com/global/en/wealthmanagement/insights/marketnews/article.17

03431.html 

Ullah, I., Haider, S. M., & Gohar, M. (2024). BRICS Expansion: Prospects 

and Challenges. Research Journal of Human and Social Aspects, 2(1), 52-64. 

US  Department  of  State.  (2005,  October  15).  ‘MBZ  meeting  with  senior 

advisor on Iraq Jeffrey (cable: 05ABUDHABI4308_a)’. 

US  Department  of  State.  (2009,  October  15).  ‘A  long  hot  summer  for 

UAE-Saudi relations (cable: 09ABUDHABI981_a)'. 

Vasileski,  Z.  (n.d.).  BRICS  VERSUS  THE  GLOBAL  WEST  IN  THE 

LIGHT  OF  CURRENT  GLOBAL  REALIZATIONS.  Towards  a  Better  Future: 

Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions, 291. 

 
