FEDERAL STATE AUTONOMOUS EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION  

OF HIGHER EDUCATION 

‘NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY “HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS” 

Faculty of Urban and Regional Development 

Ekaterina Vladimirovna Lettieva 

THE ROLE OF URBAN SHRINKAGE DISCOURSE IN MULTILEVEL GOVERNANCE: 

EVIDENCE FROM THE RUSSIAN ARCTIC 

Bachelor’s Thesis 

in the field of 07.03.04 Urban Planning 

Degree programme: Urban Planning 

The reviewer 

Supervisor 

 Senior lecturer of 

Vysokovsky Graduate School of Urbanism 

Anton V. Gorodnichev 

Moscow, 2025

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

Introduction................................................................................................................................ 5 

Chapter 1. Literature Review..................................................................................................... 9 

1.1 Urban Shrinkage as a Challenge for Multilevel Urban Governance..............................9 

1.2 Urban Shrinkage in the Russian Arctic........................................................................ 11 

1.3 Public Policymaking and Policy Design Theory..........................................................13 

1.4 Social Construction of Problems and Policy as Discourse Concept............................ 17 

Chapter 2. Context: Policy Change in the Arctic..................................................................... 19 

Chapter 3. Data and Method.................................................................................................... 21 

3.1 Quantitative Assessment of Urban Shrinkage in the Russian Arctic........................... 21 

3.2 Analysis of Media Publications and Strategic Planning Documents........................... 24 

3.2.1 Media Publications.............................................................................................. 24 

3.2.2 Strategic Planning Documents............................................................................ 25 

Chapter 4. Results.................................................................................................................... 28 

4.1 The Urban Shrinkage Media Discourse in the Arctic.................................................. 28 

4.1.1 Description of the Received Data........................................................................28 

4.1.2 QCA Results........................................................................................................31 

4.2 Urban Shrinkage Discourse in Strategic Planning Documents.................................... 47 

4.2.1 Quantitative Perspective of Discourse................................................................ 47 

4.2.1 Policy Change Through the Arctic Shrinkage Discourse....................................50 

Chapter 5. Discussion...............................................................................................................59 

Conclusion................................................................................................................................63 

References................................................................................................................................ 66 

Appendix 1............................................................................................................................... 97 

Appendix 2............................................................................................................................... 98 

Appendix 3............................................................................................................................. 100 

Appendix 4............................................................................................................................. 102 

Appendix 5............................................................................................................................. 110 

2 

 
 
List of  Figures 

Figure 1 — Simplified model of the 
policymaking process (p. 14) 

Figure 11 — Dynamics of policy necessity 
reasons mentioning, units (p. 36) 

Figure 2 — Demographic development in the 
Russian Arctic, 2021 (p. 21) 

Figure 12 — Changes in the style of shrinkage 
representation, units of codes (p. 37) 

Figure 3 — Demographic trends in Arctic 
municipalities at whole and by region, % (p. 
22) 

Figure 13 — Categories of policy responses, 
units of codes (p. 38) 

Figure 4 — CAGR in Arctic regions / Arctic 
parts of regions by two periods, % (p. 23) 

Figure 14 — Categories of policy responses 
by year, units of codes (p. 39) 

Figure 5 — Frequency of mentions of the 
Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation (p. 28) 

Figure 15 — Infrastructure responses, units of 
codes (p. 39) 

Figure 6 — Frequency of mentions of the 
‘urban shrinkage’ or ‘controlled shrinkage’ (p. 
29) 

Figure 16 — Housing responses, units of 
codes (p. 39) 

Figure 7 — Arctic regions by number of 
publications on population decline and 
population dynamics, 2014-2019 (p. 30) 

Figure 8 — Arctic regions by number of 
publications on population decline and 
population dynamics, 2020-2024 (p. 30) 

Figure 17 — Frequency of the unique 
mentions of the policy actors, units (p. 44) 

Figure 18 — Frequency of the unique 
mentions of the policy actors, units (p. 45) 

Figure 9 — Frequency of the unique mentions 
of the Arctic regions, units (p. 32) 

Figure 19 — SW mentions in regional current 
and previous strategies, units (p. 49) 

Figure 10 — Dynamics of shrinkage reasons 
mentioning, units (p. 34) 

3 

 
 
 
 
List of Tables 

Table 1 — Policymaking models (p. 15) 

Table 2 — Number of news media publications 
in the dataset (p. 25) 

Table 9 — Categories of policy actors, units 
of codes (p. 44) 

Table 10 — Number of socio-economic 
development strategies by territorial level  
(p. 47) 

Table 3 — Strategic planning documents 
sample (p. 27) 

Table 11 — Descriptive statistics on federal 
strategies SW mentioning (p. 48) 

Table 4 — Frequency of mentions of words in 
the dataset on urban shrinkage (p. 29) 

Table 12 — Descriptive statistics on regional 
strategies SW mentioning (p. 49) 

Table 5 — Words’ frequency in the dataset for 
QCA (p. 31) 

Table 13 — Descriptive statistics on 
municipal strategies SW mentioning (p. 50) 

Table 6 — Categories’ frequency in the dataset 
for QCA (p. 32) 

Table 14 — Characteristics of population 
decline representation (p. 50)  

Table 7 — Categories of urban shrinkage 
reasons (p. 33) 

Table 8 —  Description of enlarged codes  
(p. 42) 

Table 15 — Frequency of words in 
goal-setting of Socio-Economic Development 
Strategies (p. 51) 

Table 16 — Comparison of urban shrinkage 
discourse in media and planning documents 
(p. 61) 

List of  Abbreviations 

ARK — Arkhangel’sk Oblast’ 

KYA —  Krasnoyarsk Kray 

CHU — Chukotka Autonomous District 

MUR — Murmansk Oblast’ 

KAR — Karelia Republic 

NEN — Nenets Autonomous District 

KHM — Khanty-Mansi Autonomous District 

SAH — Sakha Republic (Yakutia) 

KOM — Komi Republic 

YAN — Yamal-Nenets Autonomous District 

4 

 
 
 
Introduction 

Problem statement 

The  Russian  Arctic  is  a  macro-region  including  75  municipalities  of  10  federal  entities  of  the 

Russian  Federation  (ERDC,  2024).  The  current population of the Russian Arctic is approximately 

2.41 million people (Rosstat, 2024), which is 36 per cent less than in 1989. According to the 1989 

Soviet  census,  3.78  million  people  lived  in  the  contemporary  borders  of  the  Arctic  Zone  of  the 

Russian  Federation  (Demoscope  Weekly,  n.a.). In general, the population decline in the Arctic for 

the  last  35  years  should  be  recognised  as  significant,  averaging  at  –1.28  per  cent  per annum and 

rendering the Arctic a territory of shrinkage. 

Despite  the general trend towards population decline, the process of urban shrinkage in the 

Arctic exhibits a remarkable degree of heterogeneity (Zamyatina et al., 2023). While some cities are 

shrinking significantly, others are witnessing a considerable increase in their population size. Thus, 

the  most  shrinking  cities  in  the  Arctic  —  Igarka  in  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray,  and  Inta  in  the  Komi 

Republic  —  have  seen  a  decline  of  approximately  4  per  cent  per  annum  during  the  2010-2021 

intercensal  period.  The  most  growing  Arctic  cities  over  the  same  period  are  cities  of  the 

Yamal-Nenets Autonomous Okrug. Gubkinskiy and Salekhard showed a population growth of more 

than 1 per cent per annum. The Arctic also consists of stagnating urban areas, where population loss 

is  relatively  slight.  These  include  Anadyr’  in  the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug,  with  an average 

annual  growth  of  0.05  per  cent,  and Noril’sk in the Krasnoyarsk Kray, with an average decline of 

0.05 per cent. 

The  Arctic  region  is  significantly  urbanised  territory  of  Russia,  with  an  urban  population 

close  to  90%  (Zamyatina  &  Goncharov,  2020).  The  federal  government  is  now  paying  close 

attention  to  urban  development  in extreme environments. Master plans have been designed for 16 

key  supporting  settlements  of  the  Arctic  Zone  of  the  Russian  Federation.  A  substantial  sum  of 3 

trillion  rubles  is  earmarked  for  the  implementation  of  these  comprehensive  urban  development 

strategies (TASS, 2024a). Prioritised development of the Arctic Zone as well as development of the 

Russian  Far  East  is  linked  to  efforts  aimed  at  ‘preserving  territories’  in  the  context  of  their 

depopulation (TASS, 2024b). 

The Arctic is being elevated to the status of a geostrategic region in the political discourse, 

which in turn is having an impact on governance practices. One of the most significant inquiries is 

the  current  status  of  the  discourse  surrounding  urban  shrinkage  in  the  Arctic  region  —  how  the 

urban shrinkage problem is represented, who is responsible for the problem, and what measures are 

5 

 
  
contemplated  to  address  the associated challenges in the policy formulation process. According to 

the  concept  of  ‘policy  as  discourse’,  problems  are  constructed  by  policies  themselves  as 

governmental  responses  to  those  issues (Bacchi, 2000). So, the matters of discourse formation are 

of paramount importance for comprehending policies. The large number of stakeholders associated 

with 

the  Arctic,  encompassing 

the  national,  and  subnational  governments,  municipal 

administrations, and public and private entities investing in infrastructure development, underscores 

the critical nature of this issue. 

Research problem 

This bachelor’s thesis contends that urban shrinkage is a multidimensional issue associated with the 

global  challenge  of  depopulation.  Population  decline  in  the  21st  century  is  a  systematic  and 

widespread phenomenon (Kinossian, 2018) that permeates social, political, and economic domains. 

It  necessitates  the  involvement  of  actors  at  various  territorial  scales  to  devise  more  effective 

strategies for addressing this issue (Howlett et al., 2017). 

The  research  on  urban  shrinkage  has  long  been  focused  on  examining  administrative 

responses to population decline (Lee et al., 2023). Using qualitative methods in specific instances of 

shrinkage, scholars delve into why urban shrinkage is ignored or, conversely, is placed in the policy 

agenda  (Coleman  &  Rowthorn,  2011;  Wiechmann  &  Pallagst,  2012;  Bernt  et  al.,  2014;  Hospers, 

2014; Pallagst et al., 2017; Batunova & Gunko, 2018; Hartt, 2020). 

To  address  this  question,  theoretical  frameworks  are  employed,  such  as  the  concepts  of 

‘policy  streams’  and  ‘policy  windows’  proposed  by  Bernt  et  al.  (2014),  which  delineate  specific 

conditions  which  turn  an  issue  into  a  distinct  policy.  Additionally,  the  theory of urban regimes is 

also used as a framework for understanding policies in shrinking cities (Gunko et al., 2020). 

Scholars  also  frequently  allude  to  the  institutional  settings  and  the  extent  of  local 

government autonomy, which dictate their capacity in terms of shrinkage addressing. The instances 

from  South  Korea,  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  Czechia,  and  China  demonstrate  how  the  cities’ 

responses  are  heavily  influenced  by  political  decisions  and  budgetary allocations at higher levels, 

which in turn affect the development strategies of these cities (Joo & Seo, 2018; Bernt, 2019; Zhou 

et  al.,  2022;  Bontje,  2024).  Though  ‘shrinkage  is  a  multiscalar  process  requiring  multiscalar 

governance’  (Bontje,  2024:  5),  a  significant  amount  of  papers  are  still  concentrated  on  the  local 

policies (Bernt, 2019), precluding a more comprehensive vision of governance. 

The  third  interpretation  stems  from  the  discourse  framework  in  which  policies  are shaped 

(Haase et al., 2017). The concept of ‘urban shrinkage’ is rooted in the efforts of German planners to 

provide  a neutral definition of this phenomenon to justify specific policies in depopulating eastern 

6 

 
 
cities  (Bernt  et  al.,  2016).  Nevertheless,  as  Bontje  (2024)  notes,  ‘shrinkage’  is  still  perceived 

negatively  as  something  to  be  avoided  or  as  a  problem  to  be  solved.  In  actuality,  negative  terms 

such as ‘decline’, ‘crisis’ or ‘abandonment’ are frequently employed when the process of shrinkage 

is  discussed  (Bernt  et  al.,  2016:  442).  Mallach  (2017)  shows  that  urban  shrinkage  in  the  United 

States is being portrayed as an opportunity for future growth. 

As  some  authors  note  (Rink  et  al.,  2014;  Haase  et  al.,  2016;  Batunova  &  Gunko,  2018; 

Chigareva, 2022), there has been a long-standing avoidance of urban shrinkage in Russia and other 

former socialist countries. In the term paper of Lettieva (2024), it was demonstrated that authorities 

of the Komi Republic — one of the Arctic regions of Russia — have begun to employ the concept 

of ‘controlled shrinkage’ to excuse forced measures of increasing budget expenditure efficiency. 

The  problem  with  accepting  or  ignoring shrinkage may be related to policy formulation as 

one  of  the  elements  of  the  policy  process.  At  this  stage,  problems  and  solutions  are  essentially 

created  (represented),  policy  tools  are  selected,  and  responsible  subjects  are  identified.  However, 

studies  focusing  on  policy  formulation  have  not  yet  been  presented.  The  study  aims  to  trace  the 

characteristics  of  discourse  regarding  urban  shrinkage  and  its  impact  on  multilevel  policу  in  the 

Arctic. 

Research  question:  What  are  the  characteristics  of  discourse  on  urban  shrinkage,  which  affect 

multilevel policy in the Arctic? 

Research object: discourse on urban shrinkage in the Russian Arctic. 

Research  subject:  the  role  of  urban  shrinkage  discourse  in  multilevel governance in the Russian 

Arctic. 

Research aim: to identify the role of urban shrinkage discourse in multilevel governance. 

Research tasks 

1.  To  ground  the  theoretical  framework  of  the  research  and  systematise  the existing body of 

knowledge on governance under population loss and policymaking process; 

2.  To present population dynamics at different territorial scales based on official statistics; 

3.  To contextualise public policy in the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation; 

4.  To identify the main trends of urban shrinkage problem representation in the Arctic through 

qualitative content analysis of discourse in the news media publications; 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  To  identify  discourses  on  urban  shrinkage  through  the  analysis  of  strategic  planning 

documents from different territorial levels; 

6.  To compare the results of media analysis and analysis of documents and determine the role 

of discourse on urban shrinkage in multilevel governance. 

Hypothesis 

The  public  discourse  on  urban  shrinkage  in  the  Russian  Arctic  influences  policy  formulation  by 

making the problem representation unclear and the policy response inconsistent. 

8 

 
 
 
Chapter 1. Literature Review 

1.1 Urban Shrinkage as a Challenge for Multilevel Urban Governance 

The phenomenon of urban shrinkage represents a relatively novel field of research, with a surge in 

attention towards the issue of shrinking cities emerging at the beginning of the 21st century (Turok 

&  Mykhnenko,  2007;  Hollander  et  al.,  2009;  Pallagst,  2010).  Before  this,  the  problem  of  urban 

population decline was addressed in the theoretical model of cyclic urban development, exemplified 

by  ‘A  Study  of  Growth  and  Decline’  by  van  den  Berg  et  al.  (1982).  Within  this  model, 

‘urbanisation’ and ‘desurbanisation’ were distinguished as natural phases of urban development.  

Another  perspective  views  urban  shrinkage  as  a  consequence  of  global  processes  and  the 

increasing  significance  of  metropolises  (Martinez-Fernandez  et  al.,  2012).  According  to  Brenner 

(2004),  globalisation  towards  the  end of the 20th century fostered the hierarchical arrangement of 

cities  in  European countries. Thus, the global urban system can be represented as a pyramid, with 

the  most  developed  global  centres  at  the  top  and  small  peripheral  cities  forming  the  foundation 

(Mykhnenko & Wolff, 2019). 

Migration  due  to  the economic decline in hinterlands and uncompetitive territories is often 

cited  as  a  reason  for  urban  population  decline  (Wiechmann  &  Bontje,  2015).  Indeed, 

deindustrialisation is the most common cause of urban shrinkage in Western countries (Döringer et 

al.,  2020).  Examples  include  the  old  industrial  cities  of  the  USA  (‘Rust  Belt’)  and  Great  Britain 

(Liverpool,  Manchester)  (Hollander  et  al.,  2009;  Rink  et  al.,  2012).  Another  instance  is  the 

industrial socialist cities of Eastern Europe, which underwent significant structural transformations  

(Haase  et  al.,  2016).  Additionally,  one  of the primary reasons for urban shrinkage is the tendency 

towards  population  decline  caused  by  a  decrease  in  the  birth  rate  below  the  level  of  population 

reproduction  and  population  ageing  (Coleman  &  Rowthorn,  2011;  Wiechmann  &  Bontje,  2015), 

which  leads  to  population  decline  in  developed  cities,  as  exemplified  by  Japan’s  ageing  cities 

(Döringer et al., 2020). 

There  is  a lack of universally accepted understanding of the urban shrinkage process and a 

fixed  set  of  attributes  that  characterise  a  shrinking  city  (Bernt  et  al.,  2014).  The  quantitative 

evaluation  of  shrinkage remains ambiguous and in recent studies, it is often abandoned. The mere 

fact  of  population  decline  in  cities  is  considered  sufficient,  particularly  in  qualitative research. A 

widely accepted definition could be formulated as follows: urban shrinkage is ‘population decrease 

within a defined urban territory’ (Rieniets, 2009: 236). 

9 

 
The  main  consequences  of  urban  shrinkage  are  the  housing  crisis,  leading  to  an 

accumulation of vacant properties, rising unemployment rates, a shrinking tax base, and falling city 

budget  revenues,  which  can  result  in  underinvestment  in  urban  infrastructure. Additionally, cities 

may  face  stigmatisation  (Rieniets,  2009;  Döringer  et  al.,  2020).  It  is  crucial  to  note that both the 

causes and consequences of urban shrinkage are diverse and contingent upon regional specificities. 

In  a  recent meta-analysis, Lee et al. (2023) highlighted that research on urban shrinkage in 

the  fields  of  policy  and  governance  has  gained  significant  prominence.  A  substantial  empirical 

foundation  for  research  on  governance  under  population  loss  was  provided  by  the  case  of  East 

Germany:  between  2002  and  2016  the federal program ‘Stadtumbau Ost’ (cities reconstruction of 

the East) was implemented in response to the economic and housing crisis in the shrinking Leipzig 

and other post-socialist cities of Germany (Rink et al., 2012; Bernt, 2019). Since then, many studies 

have  emerged  clarifying  the  contexts  and  practices  of  planning  or  governing  in  shrinking  cities 

across  North America, Western and Eastern Europe, and Asia (Hollander et al., 2009; Wiechmann 

&  Pallagst,  2012;  Bernt  et  al.,  2014;  Hospers,  2014;  Haase  et  al.,  2016;  Stryjakiewicz  & 

Jaroszewska,  2016;  Pallagst  et  al.,  2017;  Batunova  &  Gunko,  2018;  Joo  &  Seo,  2018;  Hartt  & 

Hackworth, 2020; Zhou et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Bontje, 2024). 

Policy  responses  to  urban  shrinkage  are  distinguished  into  four  categories:  (1)  trivialising 

shrinkage,  (2)  countering shrinkage, (3) accepting shrinkage, and (4) utilising shrinkage (Hospers, 

2014).  Nevertheless,  Eraydin  and  Özatağan  (2021)  argue  that  these categories represent stages of 

adaptation rather than distinct strategies. Researchers conceptualise urban shrinkage adaptation as a 

three-phase  process:  (1)  ‘recovery’  as  an  initial  response  to  restore  growth,  (2)  ‘adaptation’  as  a 

policy for incremental economic reorientation, and (3) ‘transformation’ akin to a ‘smart shrinkage’ 

characterised by a comprehensive economic diversification and a decrease in the size of the city. 

The  majority  of  studies  on  urban  shrinkage  tend  to  concentrate  on  case  studies,  as  the 

contextual  factors  of  urban  development,  such  as  geographical  and  political  circumstances, 

significantly  influence  policymaking  in  cities  (Bernt  et  al.,  2014;  Wiechmann  &  Bontje,  2015; 

Haase  et  al.,  2016).  Bernt  (2019)  emphasised  that  urban  policy  ought  to  be  viewed  within  the 

broader  context  of  multiple  territorial  scales,  particularly  given  that  population decline and urban 

shrinkage  constitute  a  global  trend  (Hospers,  2014;  Mykhnenko,  2023).  As  Bontje  (2024)  notes, 

‘shrinkage is a multiscalar process requiring multiscalar governance’ (Bontje, 2024: 5). 

Nonetheless,  urban  policies  in  shrinking  cities  are  seldom  explored  in  a  multilevel 

perspective.  Multilevel  governance  can  be  defined  as  ‘an  instance  of  policymaking  in  which 

government(s)  engage  with  a  variety  of  non-governmental actors, organised at different territorial 

scales,  in  a  process  of  decision-making  that  aims  to  collaboratively  produce  some  sort  of  public 

10 

 
good’ (Alcantara et al., 2016: 7). Notable examples include Joo & Seo’s (2018) study, which delves 

into  the  dual  urban  shrinkage  policies  in  South  Korea;  Bernt’s  (2019)  examination  of  how 

multilevel  policy  adaptation  to  shrinkage  in  Leipzig  (East  Germany);  and  Zhou  et  al.’s  (2022) 

analysis  of  multilevel  interactions  in  shrinking  cities  across  China,  the  Czech  Republic,  and  the 

United  States.  Additionally,  Bontje’s  research  (2024)  examines  the  outcomes  of  a  multilevel 

program aimed at coping with urban shrinkage in the Netherlands. 

The  studies  on  urban  governance  under  the shrinkage process in Russia are relatively new 

and  limited  in  number  (for  instance,  Batunova  & Gunko, 2018; Gunko et al., 2020; Zamyatina et 

al., 2020b; Chigareva, 2022; Zamyatina et al., 2023). In many cases, researchers conclude that the 

urban shrinkage problem remains largely unaddressed in Russia. Lee et al. (2023) suggest that there 

is  a  lack  of  understanding  of  strategies  to  tackle  urban  shrinkage challenges in Russia, Australia, 

Iran,  South  Korea,  and  Canada.  In  the  following  section,  I  delve  into  the  literature  on  urban 

shrinkage within the Russian Arctic. 

1.2 Urban Shrinkage in the Russian Arctic 

The development of the Russian Arctic has been highly uneven. Its mastery began long before the 

Soviet  intervention,  however,  significant  urban  growth  took  place  during  the  USSR  period. 

According  to  the  Arctic  shrinkage  expert,  Nadezhda  Zamyatina,  key  milestones  in  Arctic 

urbanisation  can  be  traced  to  waves  of  resource  exploitation.  The  first  phase,  spanning  from  the 

1920s  to  1940s,  saw  the  onset  of  Raw  Material  Colonisation  characterised  by  complex  urban 

development.  The  second  phase,  nearly  between  the  1950s  and  1980s,  marked  the  advent  of 

single-industry colonisation in the Far North. 

Cities  that  emerged  during  the  first  phase  of  Raw  Materials  colonisation  often  lost  their 

diversity  and  further  their  main  resource.  Examples  include  cities  such as Vorkuta, Inta, Kirovsk, 

and  Igarka,  which  experienced  a  significant  population  decline  of  more  than  40  per  cent.  In 

contrast, cities that emerged during the second phase specialised in extracting hydrocarbons. Some 

of  these  cities  have  seen  population  growth  due  to  the  demand  for  energy  resources  and  skilled 

labour. 

Nonetheless,  during  the  1990s,  there  was  a  significant  depopulation  of  cities  and  work 

settlements  in  the  Far  North,  which  was  attributed  to  the  closure  of  city-forming  enterprises,  the 

transition  of  cities  to  special-shift  work  status,  and  the  abandonment  of  entire  settlements 

(Zamyatina et al., 2023). The contemporary Russian Arctic is primarily a territory of shrinkage. The 

prevailing  narrative  in  explaining  the  evolution  of  Arctic  cities  through  external  forces  fails  to 

11 

 
acknowledge their resilience to challenges (Zamyatina et al., 2020a). Consequently, it is not merely 

geographical conditions that matter, but also the governance strategies employed in the Arctic. 

It is worth noting that the Arctic is one of the most urbanised areas in Russia, with a typical 

resident  being  an  urban  one  (Zamyatina,  2017;  Zamyatina  &  Goncharov,  2020).  According  to 

Zamyatina  (2017),  ‘Arctic  urbanisation  should  be  viewed  as  a  frontier,  a  boundary  of  urbanistic 

(Zamyatina,  2017:  23).  This  frontier  exhibits  a  constant  fluctuation:  the  population  in  cities 

experiences  dramatic  declines  followed  by  sharp  increases,  while  the  economic  conditions  for 

development,  particularly  in  the  raw  materials  industries,  undergo  constant  change.  While  some 

cities  continue  to  face  severe  housing  shortages,  others  are  confronted  with  significant  problems 

with infrastructure overcapacity (Zamyatina et al., 2020b). 

The  key  aspect  in  the Arctic cities’ development is their remoteness, rendering the Russian 

Arctic a remote region. Due to remoteness, Arctic cities lack numerous advantages associated with 

‘normal’  urban  development,  such  as  agglomeration  effects,  synergistic  interactions,  extensive 

networking,  and  knowledge  exchange  (Zamyatina  et  al.,  2017).  As  Zamyatina  (2017)  suggests, 

three key elements are essential for the sustainable development of Arctic cities: (1) mobility of the 

population, (2) adaptability, and (3) creativity. In the Arctic, more than anywhere else, cities need to 

be «smart» to ensure their survival and viability. 

Indeed, adaptability is an essential prerequisite for the survival of urban systems in the face 

of unstable and challenging socio-economic and climatic conditions in the Arctic. The Vorkuta city 

in  the  Komi  Republic  stands  out  as  a  striking  and  well-known  example  of  urban  shrinkage 

adaptation  in  Russia  (Shiklomanov  et  al.,  2020;  Gunko  et  al.,  2021).  In  30  years,  the  Vorkuta 

agglomeration  has  witnessed  a  loss  of  nearly  70%  of  its  population,  resulting  in  widespread 

desolation, particularly on the periphery. The municipality has been burdened with the maintenance 

costs  of  the  semi-vacant  housing  stock  of  Soviet  industrial  construction.  In  response,  the 

municipality adopted an independent strategy known as ‘controlled shrinkage’, aimed at a compact 

urban core created through the relocation of residents from the outlying areas and the preservation 

of vacant houses. 

The Komi Republic serves as a crucial case study for examining the urban shrinkage policy 

adaptation.  Remote  industrial  cities  of  the  Komi  Republic,  such  as  Inta  and  Vuktyl,  have  been 

forced  to  reshape  their  strategies  to  address  shrinkage  (Lettieva  &  Shtinov,  2023). Officials from 

regional  ministries  deem  ‘controlled  shrinkage’  to  be  the  dominant  trajectory  for  the  region’s 

development  (Lettieva,  2024).  Furthermore,  the  Komi  Republic  has  proposed  amendments  to the 

federal legislation on housing to facilitate population densification in the Arctic. 

12 

 
It is noteworthy that issues related to urban shrinkage policies have received scant attention 

in Russia. Urban shrinkage has been examined more extensively within the domain of geographical 

inquiry  rather  than  being  a  subject  of  policy analysis. The distinctive characteristics of multilevel 

governance  in  Russia  play  a pivotal role, as power and financial resources are concentrated at the 

federal  level  while  spending  responsibilities  are  dispersed  to  the  regional  level  (Yushkov  et  al., 

2017). This approach renders urban policy heavily dependent on regional and federal ones. 

In  the  context  of  the  Arctic,  policy  actors,  especially  federal,  play  a  huge  role  for  urban 

development. However, as foreign samples show, a balance of power may be differnet: for example, 

in  the  Arctic  city  of  Kiruna,  Sweden,  the  ideology  of  expansion  was  promoted  by  the  mining 

company,  Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara  Aktiebolag  (Nillson,  2010).  The  decision  to  shrink  the  city 

was also made by the company. In Canada, the urban shrinkage policy in the Arctic is much more 

localised  and  adaptive.  Cities  in  the  Klondike  region,  Yukon  (for  instance,  Dawson)  exist  in 

conditions of cyclical demand for resources with rises and declines (Vaguet et al., 2021).  

This  bachelor  thesis  explores  urban  shrinkage from a novel perspective, considering policy 

formulation  at  various  levels  of  governance.  To  achieve  this,  it  is  important  to  incorporate  the 

literature  on  the  policymaking  process  in  the  field  of  policy  studies.  In  policy  analysis,  urban 

shrinkage  may  be  presented  as  a  ‘wicked  problem’  —  a  messy,  fuzzy,  complex  multi-causal 

problem that requires intersectoral interventions (Bacchi & Goodwin, 2016). 

The way policy is formulated affects the decision-making process and, consequently, policy 

results.  The  relationship  between  discourse  and  policy in the context of urban shrinkage has been 

already  highlighted  by  Haase  (2017) and Mallach (2017). Discourses represent certain issues, and 

through  that  representation  provide  the  frame  for  policy  responses.  It  is  posited  that  a  discursive 

view on policy provides insights into how the urban shrinkage issue is represented and how policy 

tools are chosen to address the challenge of depopulation. 

1.3 Public Policymaking and Policy Design Theory 

Public policy can be defined as ‘A statement by the government — at whatever level, in whatever 

form  —  of  what  it  intends  to  do  about  a  public  problem’  (Birkland,  2019:  6).  The  absence  of 

statements can also be an implicit expression of a policy aimed at not doing something (Ibid). As a 

rule, statements are presented in the form of laws, regulations, decisions, and other forms. 

The  most  comprehensive  attempt  to  model  the  policymaking process was presented in the 

1950s  in  Lasswell’s  work,  which  has  since  been  refined  and  modified.  Jann  &  Wegrich  (2017) 

propose  a  widely  accepted  framework  for  policy  development  —  policy  cycle,  comprising  six 

13 

 
stages:  (1)  agenda  setting,  (2)  policy  formulation,  (3)  decision-making,  (4)  implementation,  (5) 

evaluation,  (6)  feedback,  and  policy  termination  or  restart  (Figure  1).  In  essence,  this  model 

presents  policymaking  as  a  linear  process,  which  has  been  criticised  for  its  oversimplification. 

Political processes rarely follow a straightforward sequence, and it is often difficult to delineate the 

various stages of policy development (Hill & Varone, 2021). 

Figure 1. Simplified model of the policymaking process 

Agenda Setting  →  Policy Formulation  →  Decision Making 

↑ 

Feedback, policy 
termination  
or restart 

← 

Evaluation 

← 

Implementation 

↓ 

Source: Jann & Wegrich (2017) 

Agenda  Setting.  Jann  &  Wegrich  (2017)  suppose  that  the  first  three  components  of  the 

policymaking  process  have  the  greatest  impact  on  policy  itself.  As  regards  agenda  setting,  it  is 

conceptualised as ‘the process by which problems and alternative solutions gain or lose public and 

elite  attention’  (Birkland,  2017:  63).  The  classical  definition  is  attributed  to  Kingdon  (1984): 

Agenda  is  ‘A  list  of  subjects  or  problems  to  which  government  officials,  and  people  outside  the 

government closely associated with those officials, are paying serious attention at any given time’. 

The  salient  feature  of  this  process  is  limited  system  capacity,  which  precludes  the  simultaneous 

consideration  of  all  issues,  thereby  necessitating  social  groups  to  vie  for  a  place  on  the  policy 

agenda. 

Cobb  &  Ross  (1997)  suggest  that it is not the problems themselves that are in competition 

but rather how they are interpreted. Thus, in the agenda-setting stage, the creation of issues occurs, 

which involves defining policy problems that are not solely determined by objective circumstances. 

The  American  scholar  Schattschneider  noted  in  the  1960s  that  a  social  group  most  effectively 

articulates  a  problem  and  proposes  solutions,  thereby  prevailing  in  policy  debates  (Mair,  1997; 

Birkland, 2017). Moreover, influential policy actors can effectively block specific issues from being 

addressed. 

Policy  Formulation  —  Policy  Designing.  The  next  stage  is  of  particular  significance. 

Policy  formulation  enables scholars to broaden the discussion on the policy process. At this stage, 

an action plan emerges for addressing the issue: what policy alternatives exist, what policy tools are 

at  the  disposal,  and  how  should  the  solutions  respond  to  the  challenges  (Sidney,  2017).  Policy 

formulation  could  be  described  as  a  process  examining  ‘various  policy  options  or  alternatives 

available for addressing a problem’ (Turnpenny et al., 2015: 4).  

14 

 
 
 
 
Bacchi  (1999),  and  Hill  &  Varone  (2021)  propose  two  primary  frameworks  for 

policymaking:   the rational comprehensive model (technical rationalists) and the politically rational 

model  (incrementalists)  (Table  1).  These  two  approaches  can  be  meaningfully  integrated  into  the 

policy  formulation  process,  as  they  seek  to  address  fundamental  questions  such  as:  what  is  the 

essence  of  the  policy,  how  and  by  whom  the  issue  is  defined,  what  should  be  the objectives and 

instruments of the policy, how a set of values is formed, and what is the solution? 

Table 1. Policymaking models 

The rational comprehensive models  
(Technical rationalists) 

Politically rational models 
(Incrementalists) 

Epistemology 

Positivist: there is a real-world accessible 
to objective description and analysis. 

Transition to post-positivist: reality is 
framed by certain references, but facts are 
waiting to be discovered. 

Approaches to 
policy 

Problem identification  

Problem definition 

Policy Analyst 

Technical expert 

Conflict manager 

Type of power 

Centralised 

Pluralistic 

Policy objectives 
(ends) and 
instruments 
(means) 

‘The ideal rational model postulates the 
prior specification of ends (perhaps we 
may call this “agenda setting”) and the 
identification of means of reaching these 
ends’ (Hill & Varone, 2021: 146) 

Values dilemma  A policymaker must pursue a consistent 

set of values.  
A stable set of values and goals is clarified 
and specified at the first stage of the 
formulation process. 

Problem solution  There is the best collective solution that 
meets the public interest, which can be 
rationally and analytically determined. 

Decision makers adjust objectives to 
available means instead of striving for a 
fixed set of objectives. 

The practical impossibility of a stable set 
of values, as negotiations and compromise 
between complementary and contradictory 
values and goals continue throughout the 
decision-making process. 

For most political decisions, there can 
never be a definitive solution, and the 
problem will remain unresolved no matter 
what policy is implemented. 

Policy essence 

1) Decision making, finding solutions to problems.  
2) Problem identification/definition and problem solution are separate elements  
of policy formulation 

Source: author’s work based on Bacchi (1999), Hill & Varone (2021) 

Theoretical  models  are  grounded  in  diverse  conceptualisations  of  dichotomies  such  as 

‘problems  —  solutions’,  ‘policy  objectives  —  policy  means’,  and  ‘values  —  facts’.  Technical 

rationalists  maintain  that  problems  exist  objectively,  whereas  political  rationalists  contend  that 

15 

 
 
 
problems are primarily determined. Both perspectives acknowledge a degree of separation between 

problems and solutions, and both view the essence of policy in problem-solving.  

Regarding  policy  objectives  and  means,  technical  rationalists  advocate  for  their  clear 

definition  by  experts  during  the  policy  formulation  stage, whereas political rationalists emphasise 

the  need  for  continuous  adjustment  of aims and instruments due to ongoing social conflicts in the 

policymaking process. 

Value considerations are largely trivialised in the technical rationalist view, with participants 

in  the  policymaking  process  expected  to  adhere  to  a  predetermined  set  of  values.  Political 

rationalists acknowledge the paramount importance of values and maintain that stakeholders ought 

to  perpetually  strive  for  a  harmonious  equilibrium  of  power  distribution  and  to  enhance 

policymaking. 

Both  approaches  are  limited  as  they  assume  certain  social  constructs,  such  as  the 

characteristics  of  target  groups, values, motivations of actors, and abstract policy objectives, to be 

self-evident.  This  assumption,  in  turn,  results  in the promotion of perspectives from the dominant 

social groups (Fischer, 2003). It is crucial to acknowledge that not only subjective elements but also 

the  policy  issues  themselves  are  not  inherently  clear or neutral. They are socially constructed and 

may change through time in response to societal values (Turnpenny et al., 2015: 4). 

The  branch  of  policy  studies  that  explores  policy  formulation  is  known  as  policy  design 

theory  (Sidney,  2017).  According  to  Linder & Peters (1987), difficulties in policy formulation are 

one of the primary causes of policy failure, highlighting the importance of effective policy design. 

Policy  design  involves the systematic collection and application of knowledge about the effects of 

policy tools on policy aims for policy development and implementation (Howlett et al., 2015: 291). 

The  supreme  policy  formulation  is  determined  by  a  supreme  set  of  policy  tools  (Howlett  & 

Mukherjee, 2018). In practice, the goal of this theory is to devise improved strategies for addressing 

issues and achieving optimal outcomes within limited administrative resources (Peters et al., 2018). 

Policy  design  theory  allows  for  the  integration  of  social  construction  processes  into  the 

process of policymaking (Schneider & Sidney, 2009). ‘Social Constructions and Policy Design’ is a 

distinct  area  of  policy  process  research  (Nowlin,  2011),  which  focuses  on  the  role  of  social 

constructions  in  shaping  policy.  Social  constructions  refer  to  a  set  of  attributes  that  have  been 

historically  formed  concerning  specific objects, subjects, and issues. Social constructionism posits 

that  multiple  interpretations  of  reality  contribute to the social reality creation, making it crucial to 

consider these interpretations in contemporary policy studies (Ingram et al., 2019). 

Why is social construction significant in policy research? According to Birkland (2017), the 

way  a  problem  is  defined  significantly  influences  the  solution  selection.  Moreover,  the 

16 

 
interpretation  of  a  problem  is  closely  linked  to  the  prevailing  social,  political,  and  ideological 

frameworks at the time of policymaking. This leads to a postmodern and post-positivist perspective 

on policymaking that emphasises the examination of policy’s role in social construction. 

1.4 Social Construction of Problems and Policy as Discourse Concept 

The  concept  of  social  construction  is  far  beyond  the traditional approaches to policy analysis and 

policy  cycle,  which  are  epistemologically  based  on  the  existence  of  knowable  objective  reality 

(these  approaches  are  often  critiqued  by  postmodernists).  In  essence,  social  construction  rejects 

positivism and empiricism and excludes the objective, unbiased observation of social reality (Burr, 

2015:  2).  Bacchi  (1999)  argues  that  policy  formulation  should  be  viewed  from  a  constructivist 

perspective,  emphasising  the  discursive  creation  of  problems.  Fischer  (2003)  goes  further, 

suggesting  that  public  policy  is  not  merely  expressed  through  words  but  is  constructed  through 

language.  He  posits  that  social  institutions  cannot  exist  independently  of  discourse,  as  widely 

accepted  intersubjective  meanings  become  embedded  within  societal  institutions  and  practices 

(Fischer, 2003: 44). 

Among  the  proponents  of  the  discursive  approach  to  policy  analysis,  authors  such as Ball 

(1993,  2015),  Fischer  (2003),  Yanow  (1995,  2007),  and  Bacchi  (1999,  2000,  2009,  2016)  can be 

highlighted. These scholars draw upon Foucauldian ontology, which establishes a close relationship 

between  knowledge,  discourse,  and  power.  In  the  realm  of  classical perspectives on the policy as 

discourse,  the  theory  of  hegemonic  discourse  by  Laclau  and  Mouffe  (Leipold  &  Winkel,  2017) 

warrants  special  attention.  According  to  the  approach  proposed  by  Foucault,  discourses  do  not 

merely  represent  reality  but  actively  contribute  to  its  construction  (McHoul  &  Grace,  2015:  35). 

Consequently, the subject or object of policy cannot be adequately understood without considering 

its discursive constructions. 

Discourse  can  be  understood  as  ‘practices  which  form  the  objects  of  which  they  speak’ 

(Ball,  2015).  Moreover,  discourse  entails  a  ‘set  of  meanings,  metaphors,  representations,  images, 

stories,  statements  and  so  on  that  in  some  way  together  produce  a  particular  version  of  events’ 

(Burr, 2015: 74). 

The  social  meanings  themselves  often  fall  within  the  interpretive  approaches  to  policy 

(Yanow,  1995;  2007).  As  she  states,  ‘Meanings are never treated independently of the contexts of 

people  doing  and  saying  the  things  that  created  those  meanings’  (Yanow,  1995:  112).  Yanow 

provides  a  crucial  starting  point  for  policy  analysis,  arguing  that  there  are  no  objective facts that 

exist outside the frameworks of perception and language. Therefore, Congressional hearings cannot 

17 

 
be  simply  viewed  as  a  collection  of  isolated  facts.  Instead,  these  hearings  offer  a  platform  for 

shaping,  refining,  and  transforming  interpretations  of  political  matters.  Furthermore,  social 

meanings (motives, intentions, objectives, and values) are always potentially open to reconstruction 

and change (Fischer 2003: 49). 

Ball  (1993)  pioneered  two  post-structuralist  concepts:  ‘policy  as  text’  and  ‘policy  as 

discourse’.  In  the  former,  policy  is  conceptualised  as  ‘textual  interventions  into  practice’  (Ball, 

1993:  12),  which  implies  that  it  narrows  or  alters  the  range  of  options  available  for 

decision-making.  In  the  latter,  ‘policy  as  discourse’  not  only  creates  multiple  meanings  but  also 

defines  the  usage  of  language,  consequently  limiting  the  potential  for  thought.  This  aligns  with 

Foucault’s  perspective,  where  discourse  represents  a  specific  body  or  form  of  knowledge  that 

restricts  what  can  be  thought,  written,  or  spoken  about  a  particular  object  or  practice  (Bacchi  & 

Goodwin, 2016: 35). Thus, discourse and power are intricately linked. 

Continuing to elaborate on the concept of Ball, Bacchi (1999, 2000, 2009) highlights that the 

challenges  in  policy  fostering  do  not  primarily arise from conscious counteraction to reforms, but 

rather  from  the  results  of  how  policy  problems  are  represented.  She  posits  that  the  impact  of 

representation can constrain policies and ongoing transformations (Bacchi, 2000: 46). Her approach 

‘What’s  the  problem  represented  to  be?’  is  predicated  on  the  social construction of policy issues, 

rejecting  the  identification  or  discovery  of  social  problems,  and  emphasising  that  policy  is  a 

discourse through which governments both create problems and solutions (Bacchi, 2009). 

Significantly,  policy  shapes  the  world  by  framing  social  ‘problems’  and  government 

‘solutions’  and  the  construction  of  concepts,  categories,  distinctions  and  subject  positions 

(Goodwin,  2011:  170).  Bacchi’s  approach seeks to answer fundamental questions such as: what is 

considered a ‘problem’? Who or what is perceived as the source of this ‘problem’? (Bacchi, 2009; 

Van Hulst et al., 2024). 

This  perspective  allows  us  to  view  policy  as  a  set of discursive practices, necessitating an 

analysis  of  policy  texts  (Goodwin,  2011).  As  the  author  pointed  out,  policymaking  is  a  far  more 

complicated  process  than  merely  responding  to  objective  data,  such  as  statistics  on  population 

decline.  This  thesis  demonstrates  that  the  urban  shrinkage  issue  is  not  trivialised  in  Russia.  The 

point  is  not  simply  that  decision-makers  fail  to  pay  attention  to  statistical  data  or  cope  with  the 

consequences,  but  rather  how  they  formulate  the  problem  and  address  it.  The  main  idea  is  that 

discourse on urban shrinkage represents certain issues, and through that representation provides the 

frame for policy responses (Haase et al., 2017). Thus, It is of particular interest to examine how the 

issue of urban shrinkage is represented and how it shapes policy in Russia, specifically in its Arctic 

part, which serves as a testing ground for innovative governance. 

18 

 
Chapter 2. Context: Policy Change in the Arctic 

Recently,  the  Russian  Government  has  been paying great attention to the Arctic. In 2014, under a 

decree  issued  by  the  President  of  the  Russian  Federation,  the  territorial  boundaries  of  the  Arctic 

Zone were delineated (President of the Russian Federation, 2014). Subsequently, from 2017 through 

2020, these boundaries were further expanded through a series of presidential decrees (President of 

the Russian Federation, 2017; 2019). In 2019, the Ministry for the Development of the Far East was 

renamed  the  Ministry  for  the  Development  of  the  Far  East  and  the  Arctic.  This  implies  that  the 

Arctic is governed more centralised with the aim of fostering growth (Libman & Yakivlev, 2021). 

The  cornerstone  of  the  Arctic’s  development  lies  in  megaprojects  undertaken  through 

public-private  partnerships  in  the  domains  of  transportation  and  oil  and  gas production. This was 

stated in previous versions of the current documents: Strategy for Development of the Arctic Zone 

of  the  Russian  Federation  and  Providing  National  Security  for  2020  (President  of  the  Russian 

Federation,  2013),  Russian  Federation  state  programme  of  Socio-Economic  Development  of  the 

Arctic Zone for 2020 (Government of the Russian Federation, 2014b).  

In  2020,  the  Fundamentals  of  the  State  Policy  of  the  Russian  Federation  in  the Arctic for 

2035 were adopted, as well as the Strategy for the Development of the Arctic Zone of the Russian 

Federation and Ensuring National Security for 2035 (hereinafter referred to as the Arctic Strategy) 

(President  of  the  Russian  Federation,  2020a;  2020b).  In  2021,  the  Government  issued  the  State 

Program  of  the  Russian  Federation  ‘Socio-Economic  Development  of  the  Arctic  Zone  of  the 

Russian Federation’ (Government of the Russian Federation, 2021), which was designed to ensure 

the implementation of the Arctic Strategy objectives. It also serves as a blueprint for regional-level 

strategic planning. 

As  Kinossian  (2017)  notes,  in  the  2010s  Russia’s  Arctic  policy  shifted  from  a  phase  of 

withdrawal to one of renewed participation through megaprojects in energy and transportation. This 

shift  and  subsequent  refocus  of  attention  are  linked  to  the discovery of vast potential for national 

economic  growth,  which  great  Arctic  resources  possess.  The resurgence of collaboration between 

the  Government  and  the  Arctic  is  driven  by  a  desire  to  regain  lost  influence,  secure access to its 

resources,  and  reverse  population  decline.  Following  Kinossian  (2017),  this  process  can  be 

described as a ‘re-colonisation’ of the Arctic. Thus, the issue of population dynamics in the Arctic 

holds significant importance. 

Nonetheless,  the  multilevel  policy  design  in  the  Arctic  remains  somewhat  obscure.  The 

resolution of issues in the Arctic has been declared as a collaborative endeavour, delineated by the 

boundaries  of  regional  and  municipal  jurisdictions.  However,  Arctic  strategic  objectives typically 

19 

 
extend  beyond  many  other  policy  actors  and  sectors.  Consequently,  the  perception  of  Arctic 

development  remains  different.  Kinosian  (2017)  underscores  the  fact  that  while  the  subnational 

level  does  not  serve  as  an  unequivocal  conduit  for  federal  policy,  it  also  does  not  operate  as  an 

independent  actor.  According  to  him,  Arctic  regions  are  ‘produced  via  multiscalar  processes  of 

policymaking, institutionalisation, and discursive practices’ (Kinossian, 2017: 221). 

Indeed, the Arctic policy is in the period of its formation and institutional consolidation — a 

creation of thematic committees in legislative bodies, commissions, designing of a national project, 

etc. Subsequently, it is still a large discursive field in which ideas are intertwined. The ideal image 

of the Arctic was announced by President Putin at the plenary session of the VI International Arctic 

Forum  in  Murmansk  (Kremlin.ru,  2025).  It  follows  from  his  words  that  the  future  Arctic  is 

characterised  by  high  rates  of  extraction  and  deep  processing  of  raw  materials,  an  ultra-efficient 

transport system, as well as comfortable growing cities. 

Thus,  there  are  national-level  objectives  linked  to the development of Arctic and maritime 

routes  and  the  expansion  of  the  national  economy  that  are  endorsed  by  federal  and  regional 

governments. Conversely, there is the depopulation issue, which presents a more pressing challenge 

at  the  subnational  level.  This  highlights  the  potential  ideological  ambiguity  surrounding  the 

approach to shrinkage addressing: how should the problem be represented, and what means should 

be implemented? Therefore, it is crucial to consider a multilevel discourse in the Arctic. 

The  ideological  dimension  of  the  paradigm  shift  in  Arctic policy cannot be overstated. As 

Wilson  (2000)  observes,  from  an  ideological  and  cultural  perspective,  the  paradigm  shifts  are 

accompanied  by  changes in the way policy problems are defined and the types of policy solutions 

presented. This approach implies that paradigm shifts also entail changes in officials’ perspectives.  

The  discursive  approach  emphasises  the  importance  of  examining  how  policy  actors 

perceive,  comprehend,  and  articulate  policy  concerns,  as  well as their interpretations of ideas and 

their  role  in  the  political  discourse  (Swinkels,  2020: 285). Political actors actively construct ideas 

about  problems  and  solutions  through  discourse  (ibid.),  and  they  also  shape  themselves  through 

discourse. 

Thus, in the face of the lack of a comprehensive response to the urban population decline in 

the Arctic, it becomes imperative to examine the discourse on urban shrinkage, which is shaped by 

political actors operating at both the national and subnational levels. 

20 

 
Chapter 3. Data and Method 

3.1 Quantitative Assessment of Urban Shrinkage in the Russian Arctic 

The extent of population decline in the Russian Arctic is noteworthy. Over a period of 32 years, the 

population  has  decreased  by  29.8  per  cent  (Demoscope  Weekly,  n.a.;  Rosstat,  2021).  For  the 

purposes of the study, the demographic situation within the municipalities of 10 Arctic regions was 

examined  and  the  population  dynamics  between  1989 and 2021, including a specific focus on the 

intercensal period from 2010 to 2021, was analysed.  

Figure  2  presents  an  overview  of  the  current  demographic  landscape  in  the  Arctic  as  of 

2022,  taking  into  account  the  results  of  the  2021  Russia  Population  census.  The  governmental 

database of municipal indicators provides data on both natural and migratory population growth. By 

analysing  the  dynamics  within  each  of  the  75  municipalities, the prevailing trend in demographic 

changes was identified. 

Figure 2. Demographic development in the Russian Arctic, 2021 

Source: author’s work based on governmental database of municipal indicators1 

The pie chart in Figure 3 illustrates the demographic structure in the Arctic. It is evident that 

the decline is primarily driven by out-migration losses, and there is also a significant natural decline 

caused by decreased birth rates and high mortality rates.  

As  depicted  in  the  bar  chart  in  Figure  3,  migration  losses  account  for  the  majority  of  the 

decline  in  7  out  of  10  Arctic  regions.  In  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray  (KYA)  and  the  Khanty-Mansi 

1 Governmantal database of municipal indicators is available. URL: https://rosstat.gov.ru/dbscripts/munst/  

21 

 
 
 
Autonomous  Okrug  (KHM),  the  proportion  of  migration  losses  is  100  per  cent.  In  the  Komi 

Republic  (KOM)  it  stands  at  75  per  cent.  The  group  experiencing  a  decline  due  to  natural  loss 

includes  the  Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’  (ARK)  and  the Karelia Republic (KAR). Additionally, in these 

two regions, the population decline has seen a notable increase compared to the rest of the regions 

during the period from 2010 to 2021, as illustrated in Figure 4. 

A relatively high rate of natural growth is observed in the key oil and gas-producing regions, 

such  as  the  Nenets  Autonomous Okrug (NEN) and the Yamal-Nenets Autonomous Okrug (YAN). 

The  Murmansk  Oblast’  (MUR)  has  traditionally  been  a  region  characterised  by  high  levels  of 

out-migration.  However,  in  recent  years,  a  trend  of  natural  decline  has  started  to  predominate  in 

many  of  its  municipalities.  The  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug  (CHU) has stood out as the region 

with the highest rate of population decline. Nevertheless, there has been a migratory increase within 

this region. The demographic situation in CHU has also been mitigated in the period from 2010 to 

2021 (Figure 4). Sakha Republic (Yakutia) (SAH) is a region that exhibits all demographic trends. 

Figure 3. Demographic trends in Arctic municipalities at whole and by region, % 

Source: author’s work based on governmental database of municipal indicators 

Figure  4  illustrates  the Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) for Arctic regions, which 

reflects  the  average  annual  dynamics  of  population  during  a  specific  period  (see  the  formula  in 

Appendix  1).  In  this  context,  a  change  of  less  than  –0.15  per  cent  annually  is  considered  as  a 

shrinkage reference. The CAGR for the entire Arctic between 1989 and 2021 amounted to –1.1 per 

cent,  with  approximately  half  of  the  Arctic  regions  exhibiting  even  lower rates. The CAGR from 

2010 to 2021 further deteriorated, reaching –1.28 per cent, indicating a more pronounced decline in 

the Arctic’s population. 

The severely shrinking Arctic regions in the recent intercensal period are those located in the 

northwestern part of Russia (ARK, KAR, KOM). It is noteworthy that at present, 9 out of 10 Arctic 

22 

 
 
 
 
regions  are  experiencing  shrinkage,  with  the  NEN  experiencing  stagnation  with  a  slight  decline. 

Even  in  the  most  actively  developing  oil  and  gas  regions,  such  as  KHM,  NEN,  and  YAN,  the 

capacity  for  growth  is  gradually  diminishing.  This  indicates  that  in  the  foreseeable  future,  the 

Arctic’s shrinkage is likely to continue. 

Figure 4. CAGR in Arctic regions / Arctic parts of regions by two periods, % 

Source: author’s work based on population census data for 1989, 2010, 2021 

As  it  was  already  noted,  the  Arctic  shrinkage  is  an  urban  shrinkage.  CAGR  was  also 

calculated  for  the  time  periods  1989–2021  and  2010–2021,  covering  all  Arctic  cities  and  two 

strategic  settlements  that  did  not  have  city  status  (Table  1  in  Appendix  2).  4  of  the  5  closed 

administrative-territorial entities in the Murmansk Oblast’ were excluded from the analysis due to a 

lack of available data, leaving a total of 34 shrinking cities under consideration. 

It is evident from the data that YAN cities experienced significant growth during the period 

1989  to  2021.  Out  of  the  total  number  of  Arctic  cities, 9 (21 per cent) showed growth. However, 

one city, Novyy Urengoy, remained stagnating. All other cities were shrinking severely, except for 

Kostomuksha  in  KAR.  The  most  pronounced  decline  was  observed  in  the cities of the KOM and 

CHU, reflecting the impact of migration outflows. 

During  the  intercensal  period  from  2010  to 2021, the prevailing tendencies have persisted. 

However,  in  recent  times,  cities  of  the  YAN  have  experienced  population  decline,  while  cities in 

CHU  have  demonstrated  stability  in  their  demographic  dynamics.  One  particular  city,  Pevek, has 

even  witnessed  overall  growth.  These  observations  underscore  the  fluctuating  nature  of  urban 

development in the Arctic. Overall, population decline in most Arctic cities remains. 

23 

 
 
 
3.2 Analysis of Media Publications and Strategic Planning Documents 

The research methodology is rooted in the conceptual framework given in the Literature Review. It 

is  contended  that  policy  as  discourse  encapsulates  certain  issues  and,  through  this representation, 

provides  the  foundation  for  policy  responses.  The  analysis  of  policy  as  discourse  means  the 

examination  of  policy  texts.  These  texts  encompass  a  wide  range  of  materials,  including  laws, 

official  documents,  political  programs,  interview  transcriptions, media articles, press releases, etc. 

(Goodwin, 2011). 

Anticipated  data  include  media  publications  featuring  statements  from  policymakers 

regarding  urban  shrinkage  policies,  as  well  as  strategic  planning  documents  from  the  Russian 

Federation, Arctic regions, and municipalities experiencing urban shrinkage, providing a multilevel 

perspective on urban shrinkage policies. The method used is qualitative content analysis (QCA). 

3.2.1 Media Publications 

Data  collection  from  news  media  publications  is  aimed  at  getting  official  statements  about  the 

Arctic  development  in  the  context  of  population  decline  between  2014  and  2024.  This  temporal 

frame is primarily dictated by the process of establishing a strategic planning framework in Russia 

(The State Duma of the Russian Federation, 2014). The decade is divided by the year 2020, which 

marked the approval of state policy in the Arctic region (President of the Russian Federation, 2020). 

The ultimate objective is to delve into the discussions surrounding urban shrinkage in the Arctic.  

The  data  is  uploaded  via  the  Medialogia2  platform.  Building  on  the  empirical  assertion 

regarding  the  prominent role of governors at the municipal level in Russia (Chirikova & Ledyaev, 

2017), the study focuses on the governors of Arctic regions as primary policy transmitters. The data 

encompassed  the  timeframes  of  2014–2019  and  2020–2024,  accounting  for  the  turnover  of 

governors. 

The context of news publications is set by word combinations describing population decline: 

‘umen’sheniye’  and  ‘snizheniye  chislennosti  naseleniya’  (population  decline),  ‘sokrashcheniye 

naseleniya’  (decrease),  ‘depopulyatsiya’  (depopulation),  ‘ubyl’  naseleniya’  (population  decline), 

‘migratsionnaya  ubyl’’  (migration  loss),  ‘estestvennaya  ubyl’’  (natural  loss),  ‘ottok  naseleniya’ 

(population  outflow),  ‘padenie  chislennosti  naseleniya’  (fall),  and  szhatie  (shrinkage).  During  the 

first  timeframe,  a  total  of  1,329  publications  were  identified,  with  reprints  accounting  for  49  per 

cent  of  the  total.  In  the  subsequent  timeframe,  2,579  publications  were  found,  with  reprints 

2 ‘Medialogia’ is an automatic media monitoring and analysis system. URL: https://www.mlg.ru/  

24 

 
constituting  48  per  cent  of  the  overall count. The analysis encompassed publications from the top 

100 media entities, without delving into specific sources, as this could worsen the sample. 

All original publications are checked for relevance to the topic, and non-substantive news is 

eliminated. Non-substantive news includes instances where population decline is merely mentioned 

without  undergoing  discussion,  or  when  the  messages  originate  from  scholars,  experts,  or  other 

public speakers rather than officials. Publications on the rural decline or depopulation of non-Arctic 

territories are also classified as non-substantive. 

The resulting data corpus consists of 106 news media publications3, with 11 originating from 

federal and 95 from regional actors. The distribution of data across each year within the 2014–2024 

timeframe  exhibits  evident  disparities.  Overall,  there has been a notable increase in interest in the 

topic since 2020, with a peak in activity observed in 2024. 

Table 2. Number of news media publications in the dataset   

2014 

2025 

2016 

2017 

2018 

2019 

2020 

2021 

2022 

2023 

2024 

6 

4 

7 

8 

2 

5 

13 

12 

4 

14 

31 

Source: author’s work 

The  analysis of the textual data was conducted through qualitative content analysis (QCA). 

Further  details  on  the  methodology  can  be  found  in  Schrierer  (2012)  and  Elo  &  Kyngas  (2008). 

QCA  employs  coding  techniques  to  analyse  relatively  large  volumes  of  data  (Alejandro  & Zhao, 

2024).  The  units  of  analysis  are  sentences  consisting  of  one  thought,  numbered  from  1 to 3. The 

analysis was conducted deductively, employing the qualitative coding tools provided by ATLAS.ti4. 

The  data  was  collected  by  highlighting  codes  corresponding  to  the  categories:  urban  shrinkage 

problem  representation,  proposed  policy  responses,  and  policy  actors.  These categories propose a 

framing framework for the QCA. All codes were distributed according to the year of publication. 

Problem  representation  codes  and  policy  responses  codes  were  analysed  to  identify 

secondary  codes  (enlarged  codes)  and  then  to  form  final  discourses  (themes).  Policy  actors  were 

also divided into groups based on their territorial level. All information was interpreted in terms of 

strategic planning and policy formulation. 

3.2.2 Strategic Planning Documents 

The discourse is also explored in socio-economic development strategies, as well as in state housing 

and  economic  programs.  According  to  Federal  Law  No.  172-FZ,  strategic  planning  documents 

3 The collection of news media publications is available. URL: https://disk.yandex.ru/i/gwKGOuPkOW3gqQ  
4 ATLAS.ti is a software for qualitative analysis. URL: https://atlasti.com/  

25 

 
include: sectoral strategies of the Russian Federation, Spatial Development Strategy of the Russian 

Federation,  state  programs  of  the  Russian  Federation, socio-economic development strategies and 

state  programs  of  entities  of  the  Russian  Federation,  socio-economic  development  strategies  and 

municipal  programs  of  municipal  entities  (The  State  Duma  of  the  Russian  Federation,  2014). 

Strategies  set  goals  and  define  development  indicators,  while  programs  implement  specific 

interventions and financing measures to achieve goals. 

In order to study multilevel policy in the Arctic, a total of 113 documents from the federal, 

regional, and municipal levels have been reviewed.  

The federal-level set of documents includes 15 units: 

2 Spatial Development Strategy of the Russian Federation (current and previous versions); 

4 Socio-Economic Development Strategies of Federal Districts that include Arctic regions; 

2  Fundamentals  of  the  State  Policy  of  the  Russian  Federation  in  the  Arctic  (current  and 

previous versions); 

2  current  and  previous  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategies  of  the Arctic Zone of the 

Russian Federation; 

2  State  Programs  for  Socio-Economic  Development  of  the  Arctic  Zone  of  the  Russian 

Federation; 

The current Construction and Housing Development Strategy of the Russian Federation; 

The current State Program on Housing of the Russian Federation; 

The current State Program on Economic Development of the Russian Federation. 

The regional-level set of documents includes 49 units: 

11  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategies  of  Federal  Entities  of the Russian Federation. 

In  addition  to  the  10  existing  regional  strategies,  the  Republic  of  Sakha  (Yakutia)  has  a  separate 

strategy for the development of its Arctic territories; 

7  previous  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategies  of  federal  entities  of  the  Russian 

Federation.  The  Republic  of  Sakha  (Yakutia),  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  and  the  Chukotka 

Autonomous Okrug have no outdated strategies available; 

10 current State Programs on Housing of entities of the Russian Federation; 

5  previous  State Programs on Housing of Entities of the Russian Federation. The 5 federal 

entities  —  the  Yamal-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  the  Karelia 

Republic,  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray,  and  the  Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’  —  do  not  maintain  outdated 

versions of the documents. Instead, their state programs are not replaced, but rather updated; 

10  current  State  Programs  on  the  Economic  Development  of  entities  of  the  Russian 

Federation; 

26 

 
6 previous State Programs on Economic Development of entities of the Russian Federation. 

4  subjects  —  the  Yamal-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  Karelia 

Republic, and the Krasnoyarsk Kray — do not have outdated versions of the documents. 

The municipal-level set of documents includes 49 units: 

30  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategies  of  municipal  entities.  3  shrinking  cities  have 

not been found to have current strategies available. 

19  previous  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategies  of  municipal  entities.  14  shrinking 

cities have not been found to have current strategies available. 

The information on the document count is gathered in Table 3. 

Table 3. Strategic planning documents sample  

Territorial Level 

Non-current 

Current 

Total 

Federal 

Regional 

Municipal 

7 

18 

19 

8 

31 

30 

15 

49 

49 

Source: author’s work 

27 

 
 
Chapter 4. Results 

4.1 The Urban Shrinkage Media Discourse in the Arctic  

4.1.1 Description of the Received Data 

The mention of the Arctic has been vividly growing. Figure 5 shows the number of mentions of the 

Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation from 2010 to 2024. There was a sharp increase in mentions 

from  2019  to  2020  due  to  the  approval  of  the  new Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the 

Arctic. However, the number of mentions decreased in 2022 but quickly recovered by 2024 due to 

high media attention on national security. 

Figure 5. Frequency of mentions of the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation 

Source: author’s work based on Medialogia’s data 

Figure  6  shows  a  reference  to  ‘urban’  or  ‘controlled’  shrinkage.  The  spike  in mentions in 

2014 is associated with an active discussion on single-industry town development in Russia. It was 

also  in  2014  when  the  classification  of  these  towns  based  on  their  socio-economic  status  was 

introduced.  A  slight  increase  in  2017  can  be  attributed  to  the  launch  of  a  municipal  program for 

controlled shrinkage in Vorkuta City, Komi Republic. This was when urban shrinkage started to be 

discussed on a regional level. The growth of mentions between 2019 and 2021 can be linked to an 

increase  in  discussion  about  the  challenges  of  northern  shrinking  cities  in  the  Komi  Republic. 

Currently, this topic continues to form the agenda for this region. 

The  role  of  the  Komi  Republic  is  presented  in  Table  3.  In  particular,  the  development  of 

Vorkuta  is  discussed  in  terms  of  urban  shrinkage.  This  discussion  seems  to  imply  that  urban 

28 

 
 
shrinkage is a local issue that does not affect other regions. However, it only reinforces the need for 

a more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon. 

Figure 6. Frequency of mentions of the ‘urban shrinkage’ or ‘controlled shrinkage’ 

Source: author’s work based on Medialogia’s data 

Table 4. Frequency of mentions of words in the dataset on urban shrinkage 

Vorkuta  Shrinkage 

City  Development 

Town 

Population 

Single-industry 
town 

Komi 

Controlled 

537 

288 

264 

240 

210 

179 

155 

138 

128 

Source: Medialogia’s data 

For a study, statistical data on the number of publications, including reprints, related to each 

of the ten governors for the periods from 2014 to 2019 and 2019 to 2024 was compiled. The context 

for  these  publications  is  the  population  decline  in  the  respective  regions.  The  findings  are 

significant:  in  five  out  of  ten  regions  discussions  regarding  population  decline  have  become 

increasingly  prevalent  over  the  past  decade.  These  regions  include  the  Murmansk  Oblast’,  the 

Sakha Republic (Yakutia), the Arkhangel’sk Oblast’, the Komi Republic, and the Karelia Republic. 

Tables  1  and  2  in  Appendix  3  provide  details  on  the number of reports each year for each Arctic 

governor.  It  is  worth  noting that there has been a notable increase in discussions about population 

decline within the Arctic region over time. 

Figures  7  and  8  present  a  comparative  analysis  of  the  ratio  between  the  number  of 

publications  made  in  2014–2019  and  2020–2024  and  population  dynamics  in  the  Arctic  regions 

over  the  same  periods.  Ideally,  the  regions should line up diagonally relative to each other, where 

the number of publications increases with the magnitude of the population decline. While nine out 

of ten regions experienced a population loss over time, the publication number varied. In particular, 

29 

 
 
the  number  of  publications  increased  in  ARK,  MUR,  KOM,  and  KAR,  whereas  it  decreased  in 

CHU,  YAN,  NEN,  and  KYA.  It  is  worth  noting  that  many  regions  tended  to  overemphasise 

discussions  on  population  decline,  whereas  now,  the  majority  of  regions  are  underreporting  this 

issue.  However,  it  is  important  to  highlight  that  SAH  and  MUR  are  the  most  active  regions  in 

discussing this topic. 

Figure 7. Arctic regions by number of publications on population decline and population 
dynamics, 2014-2019  

Source: author’s work based on Medialogia’s data, Rosstat data (2014, 2020) 

Figure 8. Arctic regions by number of publications on population decline and population 
dynamics, 2020-2024 

Source: author’s work based on Medialogia’s data, Rosstat data (2020, 2024) 

30 

 
 
 
 
4.1.2 QCA Results  

The  final  sample  of  106  new  media  publications  was  analysed  for  the  frequency  of  mention  of 

various significant words and their derivatives by using Voyant Tools5. Table 5 presents words that 

appeared  more  than  100  times.  As  can  be  seen,  in  addition  to  geographical  specifics  such  as  the 

Arctic and the North, the top ten words include sectoral-specific terms like housing, economy, and 

two  types  of  government  —  project  and  process  —  as  well  as  three  levels  of  decision-making. 

Shrinkage-related  terms  primarily  refer  to  living  conditions,  including  housing,  construction, 

investment, infrastructure, displacement, and mortgage. The most commonly mentioned regions are 

the Murmansk Oblast’ and the Komi Republic, which generate discourse about urban shrinkage in 

the Arctic most of all. 

Table 5. Words’ frequency in the dataset for QCA 

№  Word 

Frequency 

№  Word 

Frequency 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Arktika (Arctic) 

Razvitiye (Development)  

Region 

Sever (North) 

Gorod (City) 

Zhil’ye (Housing) 

7 

Proyekty (Projects) 

748 

527 

519 

372 

323 

320 

314 

8 

Federatsiya (Federation) 

291 

9 

Programmy (Programs) 

10 

Ekonomika (Economy) 

11  Naseleniye (Population) 

12 

Stroitel’stvo 
(Construction) 

13  Respublika (Republic) 

14  Vorkuta (Vorkuta city) 

280 

269 

268 

266 

253 

218 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

Realizatsiya (Realisation) 

Sotsial’nyy (Social) 

Investitsii (Investment) 

Komi 

Prezident (President) 

Pravitel’stvo 
(Government) 

Monogorod 
(Single-industry town) 

Molodezh’ (Young 
people) 

Infrastruktura 
(Infrastructure) 

Gubernator (Governor) 

Usloviya (Conditions) 

29 

Ottok (Outflow) 

30 

Gosudarstvo (State) 

31 

Munitsipalitet 
(Municipality) 

186 

181 

170 

166 

160 

156 

146 

143 

141 

140 

139 

138 

131 

126 

5 ‘Voyant Tools’ is a web space for reading and analysing digital texts. URL: https://voyant-tools.org/  

31 

 
15  Murmnskaya (Murmansk) 

16 

Podderzhka (Support)  

17 

Problemy (Problems) 

207 

206 

202 

32 

Byudzhet (Budget) 

33 

Pereseleniye 
(Displacement) 

34 

Ipoteka (Mortgage) 

112 

110 

107 

Source: author’s work 

This statement is confirmed by the frequency of unique mentions of the Arctic regions in the 

dataset.  Figure  9  shows the distribution of these mentions and, in fact, the number of publications 

originating  from  each  region  that  were  included  in  the  research.  In  essence,  the predominance of 

publications  originating  from  KOM,  MUR,  and  ARK  within  the  sample  aligns  with  the  broader 

pattern  of  publications  on  population  decline. This indicates the relative representativeness of this 

sample for qualitative analysis. 

Figure 9. Frequency of the unique mentions of the Arctic regions, units  

Source: author’s work 

During  the  QCA,  textual  data  were  coded  into  three  categories:  problem  representation, 

police  responses,  and  policy  actors.  Table  6  consists  of  the  quantitative  characteristics  of  these 

categories,  specifically  indicating  the  number  of  initial  coding  units.  A  total  of  331  initial  codes 

were  identified,  and  310  actors  at  various  territorial  levels  were  highlighted.  The  subsequent 

sections will present a comprehensive analysis of each category. 

Table 6. Categories’ frequency in the dataset for QCA 

Coding units 

Problem representation 

Solutions 

Policy actors 

Number of 
initial codes 

2014-2020 

2020-2025 

2014-2020 

2020-2025 

2014-2020 

2020-2025 

41 

77 

57 

156 

95 

215 

Source: author’s work 

32 

 
 
 
Problem representation 

In this section of the analysis, the responses of policymakers to some questions were considered: 

(1) Why  is  shrinkage  occurring?  105  potential  reasons  were  considered  and  reduced  to  six 

enlarged codes.  

(2) How exactly does the shrinkage process go? 70 points were considered and categorised into 

three enlarged codes. 

(3) Which population groups are involved? 22 were found and consolidated into three enlarged 

codes. 

(4) What are the implications of population decline? 57 potential consequences were identified 

and grouped into three enlarged codes. 

Furthermore, all initial codes were assessed in terms of their attitude on population decline: 

either  neutral,  where  the  issue  is  simply  stated  without  any  evaluation,  or  negative,  where 

population decline is viewed as a catastrophic trend. 

Why  is  shrinkage  occurring?  The  reasons  for  urban  shrinkage  in  the  Arctic  regions  are 

divided  into  Political,  Economic,  Demographic,  and  Climate  reasons, Infrastructural and Housing 

problems. Political reasons include the territorial politics of previous regimes in Russia. Economic 

reasons are linked to economic downturn and deindustrialisation, which have led to a lack of jobs. 

Demographic  factors include population reproduction in the Arctic and the deterioration of human 

capital due to outmigration and high mortality rates. Climate factors include living conditions in the 

Far  North.  Infrastructural  problems  arise  from  deficiencies  in  social  infrastructure,  urban 

environments,  and  transportation,  while  housing  problems  stem  from  a  shortage  of  available 

housing  in  the  Arctic. Table 7 provides information on the contributing factors. It is of a note that 

infrastructure  and  housing problems are associated with urban environments. Thus, the population 

decrease  in  the  Arctic  is  caused  by  the  poor  living  conditions in cities, which discourages people 

from moving there. 

Table 7. Categories of urban shrinkage reasons 

Political 
reasons 

Economic 
reasons 

Demographic 
reasons 

Climate 
reasons 

Infrastructural 
problems 

Housing 
problems 

Share, % 

13 

31 

8 

9 

15 

24 

Source: author’s work 

Figure  10  illustrates  the  dynamics  of  the  population  decline  causes  (demographic  and 

climate  reasons  are  excluded,  as  they  are  not  indicative).  As  can  be  seen,  from  2019  to  2023, 

economic issues dominated, mainly due to a lack of employment opportunities, low wages, limited 

33 

 
 
specialist markets, and low career prospects. Housing problems became more prevalent in 2023 due 

to preferential mortgage programs for the Arctic region. Although it is hoped that more affordable 

housing would reduce population outflow, the creation of such housing requires new construction in 

the Arctic. 

Figure 10. Dynamics of shrinkage reasons mentioning, units 

Source: author’s work 

How  exactly does the shrinkage process go? A vast majority of codes, accounting for 89% 

of  the  total,  employ  the  term  ‘outflow’  or  ‘migration  loss’  to  describe  this  phenomenon.  The 

remaining portion either refers to natural loss or lacks any specific explanation. This trend is likely 

attributed to the historical context of population dynamics in the Russian Far North. Consequently, 

despite  the  presence  of  a  growing  trend  towards  natural  decline  in  some  Arctic  regions,  policy 

responses are more likely to be directed towards the housing sector rather than the healthcare sector. 

Which  population  groups  are  involved?  68  per  cent  of  all  positions  are  related  to  young 

people  —  this  is  precisely  the  group  that  contributes  to  the  outflow  of  population  and  must  be 

retained in the North. Young professionals are sometimes referred to as a separate category, which 

governors  seek  to attract to the Arctic region. It is also noteworthy that newcomers are mentioned 

—  they  came  to  work  in  the  Arctic  during  the  Soviet  period  and  migrated  back  to  their  home 

regions. Additionally, there is mention of shift workers in this context. 

The first thing to pay attention to is the conditions necessary to ensure the well-being 

of young people in the [Karelia] Republic and reduce their outflow from the region. 

Young people should be encouraged to stay and contribute to the development of the 

34 

 
 
 
human  capital  and  economy  of  their  home  territory.  [Head  of  Karelia  Republic, 

2023]. 

We do not want to be a region of shift workers — then the region will not thrive, and 

people  will  not  treat  the  territory  as  their  own.  We  can  not  develop  and  retain  the 

Arctic  only  with  the  efforts  of  shift  workers  [Governor  of  the  Murmansk  Oblast’, 

2021]. 

Despite  the  Governor  of  the  Arkhangel’sk  region  reporting  that the largest outflow occurs 

among  older  people,  it  is  the  younger  generation  that  will  be  the  key  to  maintaining  the 

demographic balance in the Arctic, given the significant population decline. The focus on attracting 

young people is a strategic move aimed at addressing the threat of population extinction. 

What  are  the  implications  of population decline? Three categories were identified, and the 

dynamics of mentions of positions from these groups is shown in Figure 11. 

(1) Vacant  housing  and  infrastructure  overcapacity,  which  result  in  excessive  municipal 

expenditures. It is a pressing concern in the Komi Republic. The population loss inevitably 

places a strain on municipal budgets, while excess expenditures are allocated to the regional 

budget. It is imperative to implement measures aimed at reducing these expenses. 

(2) A  shortage  of  labour  resources,  particularly  in  projects  operating  in  the  Arctic region and 

industrial  sectors.  Qualified  workers  are  in  high  demand  for these endeavours. To address 

this  issue,  it  is  crucial  to  implement  strategies  aimed  at  supporting  the  economy,  such  as 

retaining and training local specialists, as well as attracting new people. Additionally, there 

exists a dearth of professionals in the fields of healthcare and education, necessitating their 

active engagement through various means. 

(3) Failure  to  meet  the  indicators  and  requirements  of  federal  policy.  This  is  an  important 

consequence  for  officials,  not  for  the  territory.  The  need  to  address  population  decline  is 

driven  by  political  considerations. While this may not be explicitly stated, it is essential to 

achieve  the  objectives  of  national  projects, foster the development and maintenance of the 

Arctic  under  new  geopolitical  circumstances,  uphold  national  security,  and  initiate 

megaprojects. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Dynamics of policy necessity reasons mentioning, units 

Source: author’s work 

It  is  not  surprising  that  references  to  ideological  factors  have  been  on  the  increase  since 

2019. The need to generate population growth in the Arctic was highlighted in conjunction with the 

initiation  of  national  projects  in  Russia  in  2018  and  the  approval  of  the  Socio-Economic 

Development  Strategy  of  the  Arctic  Zone  in  2020.  In  parallel  with  a  discourse  on  reversing 

population  loss,  there is an active movement towards adapting to the shrinkage. These contrasting 

viewpoints are represented by the Murmansk Oblast’ and the Komi Republic. 

We  are  striving  to  ensure  that  the  number  of  people  leaving the North is as low as 

possible,  while the number arriving is as high as possible. In 2019, we set a goal to 

reverse the trend of population decline by the year 2030 [Governor of the Murmansk 

Oblast’, 2023]. 

The initiative of the Komi Republic is aimed at reducing vacant housing, which has 

arisen  in  connection  with  both  the  natural  and  migratory  decline  in single-industry 

Arctic towns such as Vorkuta and Inta [Head of the Komi Republic, 2024]. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  coexistence  of  two  distinct  discourses  is  further  evidenced  by  the  dynamics  of  urban 

shrinkage  representation,  as  depicted in Figure 12. The decline observed in 2018 and 2022 can be 

attributed  to  the  scarcity  of  publications  during  those  years.  However,  the  multifaceted dynamics 

from  2019  to  2020  warrant  particular  attention.  Despite a prevailing negative perception of urban 

shrinkage,  with  a  ratio  of  64 negative to 53 neutral views, it cannot be asserted that policymakers 

regard population decline as a disaster. 

Figure 12. Changes in the style of shrinkage representation, units of codes 

Source: author’s work 

Policy responses 

A total of 213 initial codes were initially identified, which subsequently expanded to 247 as certain 

text  fragments  frequently  encompassed  multiple  distinct  responses.  These  247  codes  have  been 

categorised into five groups. 

(1) Social  sphere:  includes  a  diverse  range  of  benefits  to  the  general  population.  This 

encompasses efforts to attract medical professionals, educators, and social workers, enhance 

educational  opportunities,  establish  specialised  medical  standards,  and  provide  social 

services of a high quality. 

(2) Regulatory  measures:  include  the  approval  of  regulatory  documents,  and  strategies,  the 

creation of departments and institutions, competitions for federal funds, and the protectionist 

policy of the state. 

(3) Economy:  includes  bolstering  key  sectors  of  the  economy,  empowering  entrepreneurs, 

initiating  investment  projects,  fostering  job creation, enhancing salaries, and establishing a 

retraining program tailored to the specific requirements of the Arctic region. 

37 

 
 
 
(4) Housing: includes the construction of new houses and attracting developers to the areas for 

this  purpose.  It  also  proposes  efforts  to  reduce  the  housing  fund  and  increase  population 

density, as well as efforts to resolve housing problems through preferential mechanisms. 

(5) Infrastructure:  encompasses  both  the  development  or  renovation  of  infrastructure  and  its 

reduction.  Infrastructure  is  presented  in  close  correlation  with  the  discussion  on  the 

comfortisation  of  Arctic  cities.  Comfort  must  be  attained  through  both  infrastructure 

expansion and shrinkage. 

As  illustrated  in  Figure  13,  both  the  Housing  and  Infrastructure  categories  of  policy 

responses  dominate,  with  the  Economic  category  also  comprising  a  sizable  array  of  codes.  This 

indicates that the primary focus of efforts to combat shrinkage is anticipated to be directed towards 

the housing sector and enhancing the built environment. 

Figure 13. Categories of policy responses, units of codes 

Concerning temporal dynamics, there has been a marked increase in the number of codes in 

Housing  responses  and  Infrastructure  responses  categories  since  the  year  2020,  as  depicted  in 

Figure  14.  This  sustained  growth  in  the  housing  sector  suggests  a  heightened  focus  on  the 

development of urban areas in the Arctic region in response to population loss. 

Source: author’s work 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Categories of policy responses by year, units of codes 

Source: author’s work 

It  has  been  noted  that  in  the  most  populous  categories  —  Housing  and  Infrastructure 

responses — multifaceted policies are evident. Figures 15 and 16 illustrate the distribution of codes 

aimed at growth and shrinkage in these two domains. In both cases, there is a predominant focus on 

growth, particularly in terms of infrastructure expansion and housing construction. However, within 

the realm of housing, the emphasis on fostering growth in Arctic housing initiatives is particularly 

pronounced. In the infrastructure domain, measures promoting shrinkage account for 46 per cent of 

the total, and in the housing sector — 34 per cent. 

Figure 15. Infrastructure responses, units of codes 

Figure 16. Housing responses, units of codes 

Source: author’s work 

Source: author’s work 

Among  the  reasons  for  urban  shrinkage,  economic  considerations  related  to  personnel 

shortages take precedence. In response, measures in housing and infrastructure areas are prioritised. 

According  to  officials’  reasoning,  economic  activity  is expected to emerge once favourable living 

conditions  in  urban  areas  are  established.  Conversely,  in  the  absence  of  economic  attractiveness, 

39 

 
 
 
 
developers are less likely to enter the region, leaving individuals unmotivated to relocate even with 

the availability of new housing options. 

The  question  of  whether  the  economy  or  urban  environment  is  more  fundamental  has not 

been definitively answered. On the one hand, an economically favourable environment should serve 

as an impetus for urban development. On the other, it is essential to construct new housing to attract 

individuals  to  the  Arctic,  enabling  them  to  contribute  to  the  region’s  economic  growth.  This 

conundrum  is  exemplified  by  statements  from  officials  in  Arctic  regions.The  Komi  Republic 

prioritises  economic  engagement  as  a  catalyst  for  Arctic  development,  with  environmental 

considerations taking a secondary role. 

The creation of conditions for the development of both large and small businesses in the 

Arctic will provide a new impetus for growth. Incoming investments will allow for the 

expansion  or  establishment  of  new production facilities. This will create new jobs and 

help  reduce the population outflow, directly impacting the social services development 

and the quality of life improvement [Komi Republic official, 2024]. 

On the contrary, in the context of federal policy, as well as in other regions actively fighting 

the issue of population outflow, significant emphasis is placed on comfortisation of urban space and 

living  conditions.  This  trend  is  not  unique  to  the  Arctic,  but  it  is  important  that  creating  a 

comfortable environment is not merely a means to foster economic development, but also a crucial 

factor of attracting population to a particular territory. 

We  have  set  the  task  to  create  a  competitive  university,  which  is  the  centre  of 

competence  [in  the  Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’].  This  is  an  ambitious  task.  Its  solution 

requires  the  involvement  of  appropriate  teaching  staff  and  specialists.  In  the  current 

state  of  Arkhangelsk,  this task is particularly challenging. The city requires significant 

urban environment improvement [Federal official, 2020]. 

We are actively seeking to improve the urban environment. We are investing in modern 

public  spaces, renovating facades, and implementing decorative lighting solutions. Not 

a single city in our region remains untouched by these transformations. To attract young 

people  to  our  cities,  we  must  leapfrog  into  the  post-industrial  era  [Governor  of  the 

Murmansk Oblast’, 2021]. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the year 2017, there was already an active discussion initiated regarding a unified policy 

for the Arctic region. The focus was on exploring new avenues for Arctic development through the 

establishment of support zones. This sparked further conceptual discussions among regional leaders 

about  the  region’s  future  trajectory.  Two  distinct  discourses  emerged:  one  advocating  for growth, 

and  the  other  advocating  for  shrinkage.  Already  in  2017,  efforts  were  underway  to  enhance  the 

comfort of Arctic cities. However, it is crucial to note that both growth and shrinkage can contribute 

to improving the quality of life. 

When  we  discuss  the  societal  role  of  government,  we  are  primarily  concerned  with 

creating the conditions for human life. Indeed, this process [establishing support zones] 

provides  the  foundation  for  the  Arctic  regions  development,  the  emergence  of  new 

industries,  the  generation  of  new  jobs,  and  more  comfortable  living  conditions  for 

people  living  in  northern  territories,  ensuring  that  they  do  not  feel  marginalised  in 

comparison to those living in central and southern areas [Governor of the Arkhangel’sk 

Oblast’, 2017]. 

It  is  imperative  to  close  the  economically  stagnant  settlements  that  lack  prospects for 

future  development,  and  compact  Vorkuta.  Additionally,  it  is  crucial  to  enhance  the 

conditions  in  two  or  three  selected  towns  that  hold  promise  for  growth.  These  areas 

must  be  equipped  with  a  distinct  infrastructure  and  robust  social  support  systems, 

fostering a lifestyle characterised by quality and abundance. People need to understand 

that  they  live  a  high-quality  life  and  they  have  everything  needed  [Head of the Komi 

Republic, 2017]. 

In  order  to  conduct  a  critical  assessment  of  the  measures  aimed  at  addressing  population 

decline,  the  enlarged  codes  were  revisited  and  expanded  into  discourses  (themes)  (Table  8).  It  is 

worth  noting  that  all  the  enlarged  codes  focus  on  increasing  the  quality  of  life  for  citizens. 

Nonetheless,  at  the  state  level,  other  objectives  related  to  demographic,  economic,  and  housing 

indicators  are  pursued.  The  development  of  programmes  and  plans  designed  to  improve people’s 

living standards ultimately boils down to allocating resources in a more targeted manner. 

In  the  Arctic,  there  is  a  debate  about  retaining  and  attracting  populations  to  permanent 

settlements  in  the  northern  regions.  The  analysis  reveals  that  the  proposed  initiatives  are  geared 

towards  ‘buying  people’  and  providing  them  with  enhanced  comfort,  rather  than,  for  instance, 

improving the medical and social services available to the existing Arctic population. 

41 

 
 
 
 
Table 8. Description of enlarged codes 

Enlarged codes 

Description 

Codes 

Social sphere 
responses 

Responses aimed 
at improving 
demographics 

Education 
improvement, 
medicine quality, 
preferences for 
social staff, 
support for young 
families, support 
for students 

Themes 
(discourses) 

Providing 
financial benefits 

Regulatory 
measures 

Responses aimed 
at shaping a more 
precise policy 
and its financing 

Laws or 
programs 
approvement, 
policy reforms 

Providing 
financial benefits 

Economic 
responses 

Providing 
financial benefits 

Responses aimed 
at population 
retention for the 
economic 
indicators growth 

Support for 
entrepreneurs, 
special modes, 
arctic personnel, 
job security, 
diversification, 
public-private 
partnership 

Responses in 
Housing and 
Construction 

Responses aimed 
at rebooting the 
economy or 
solving acute 
problems 

Сonstruction of 
new housing, 
preferential 
mortgages, 
support for 
developers, 

Providing 
financial benefits 

Compactisation 

42 

Examples (Quotes) 

‘We propose to pay 2 
million rubles to 
specialists who come to 
work as health 
professionals in the 
Arctic’ [Governor of the 
Murmansk Oblast’, 
2017] 

‘Health professionals 
should be afforded 
greater preferences in 
terms of salaries and 
social benefits, for they 
treat their patients not in 
an environment of 
blooming apples, but 
rather in the ice and 
frost’ [Governor of the 
Arkhangel’sk Oblast’, 
2017] 

‘The Youth Government 
of the Komi Republic 
was formed on the 
initiative of the Head of 
the Komi Republic [...] 
and acts as an advisory 
body to the Head of the 
Komi Republic’ 
[Newspaper reporter, 
2016] 

‘The conditions created 
for large and small 
businesses will become a 
new catalyst for 
development in the 
Arctic. [...] This will 
provide new jobs and 
reduce the population 
outflow’ [Komi Republic 
official, 2024] 

‘The implementation of 
the Arctic Mortgage 
program in the Nenets 
Autonomous Okrug will 
contribute to enhancing 
housing conditions for 

 
 
 
Infrastructure 
responses 

Responses aimed 
at increasing the 
comfort of life 

reduction of 
vacant housing 

Comfortable 
urban 
environment, 
accessible social 
infrastructure, 
accessible 
utilities  

Comfortisation  

young families. And not 
only that! We plan to 
attract young specialists 
to our region’ [Governor 
of the Nenets 
Autonomous Okrug, 
2023] 

‘The factor of 
[population] attraction 
and normal living 
conditions, a comfortable 
urban environment, and 
an intellectual 
environment [Governor 
of the Krasnoyarsk Kray, 
2019] 

Source: author’s work 

Policy actors 

While studying urban shrinkage policies, it becomes imperative to pay attention to the policy actors 

who  address  the  challenge  of  population  decline.  In  this  context,  a  unique  mention  of  actors  of 

different levels was calculated. 

(1) Federal  actors:  President, representatives from state corporations, and executive authorities 

such  as  ministers  and  heads  of  departments,  legislative  authorities  such  as  senators  and 

deputies. The total number of mentions related to these actors amounts to 117; 

(1) Regional  actors:  heads  of  the  Arctic  regions,  representatives  of  regional  executive  and 

legislative authorities. There are 112 mentions in total; 

(2) Municipal  actors:  heads  of 

the  Arctic  municipalities, 

representatives  of 

local 

administrations,  as  well  as  deputies  of  local  councils.  The  total  number of mentions is 37 

mentions; 

(3) Other  actors:  industrial  and  consulting  companies,  public  organisations,  educational  and 

scientific institutions. There are 44 mentions in total. 

Table 9 presents a policy actors distribution across the timeframes under consideration. The 

increased  prominence  of  actors  from  2020  to  2024  can  be  attributed  to the substantial volume of 

publications  on  population  decline  during  this  period.  Notably,  the  most  significant  increase  in 

references  occurred  at  the  federal  level,  which  may  be  directly  linked  to  the  intensification  of 

centralised  federal  policy  in  the  Arctic  region,  as  well  as  the  enhanced  role  of  federal  political 

figures  in  regional  and  municipal  settings,  which  emerged  following  the  policy  shift  towards 

governance through national projects initiated in 2018. 

43 

 
 
 
Table 9. Categories of policy actors, units of codes 

Federal 

Regional 

Municipal 

Other 

2014-2019  2020-2024  2014-2019  2020-2024  2014-2019  2020-2024  2014-2019  2020-2024 

27 

90 

41 

71 

10 

27 

17 

27 

Source: author’s work 

Figure  17  illustrates  the  dynamics  of  various  actors  mentioned  in  the  news  media 

publications  dataset.  Since  2020,  there  has  indeed  been  a  rise  in  the  prominence  of  federal 

authorities.  The  marked  increase  in  references  to  federal  actors  in  2024  can  be  attributed  to  the 

initiative of the Komi Republic to introduce a law on preserving abandoned houses, which garnered 

significant  attention  from  various  federal  ministries,  the  State  Duma, and the Federation Council. 

The references to municipal actors have slightly increased recently, owing to the growing visibility 

of the shrinking Vorkuta city on the federal media stage. 

Figure 17. Frequency of the unique mentions of the policy actors, units 

Source: author’s work 

The  distribution  of  actors  by  Arctic  regions,  as  depicted  in  Figure  18,  is  noteworthy.  The 

Komi Republic exhibits the highest concentration of references to regional actors, with discussions 

on  urban  shrinkage  in  the  North  being  led  by  regional  government  officials,  including 

representatives from the Ministry of Construction, Housing, and Utilities, the Ministry of Finance, 

the Ministry of Economics, and the Ministry of Natural Resources; Deputies of the State Council of 

the Komi Republic and others. 

The  head  of the Komi Republic accounts for only 30 per cent of all mentions, despite being 

the starting point for sample formation. Additionally, federal actors receive the most attention in the 

Komi Republic, which can be attributed to the region’s engagement with the federal government in 

44 

 
 
legislative  reforms.  Furthermore,  most  of the municipal actors mentioned must be concentrated in 

the  Komi  Republic,  particularly  the  authorities  of  Vorkuta.  Overall,  the  issue  of  urban  shrinkage 

here is primarily a matter of active regional government efforts. 

In the Murmansk Oblast’ federal, and regional authorities, as well as private actors, mainly 

industrial  enterprises,  all  play  significant  roles.  The  governor’s  influence  is  particularly  notable, 

accounting  for  89  per  cent  of  references  in  a  count  of  regional  actors.  Consequently,  addressing 

urban  shrinkage  in  this  region  necessitates  the  promotion  of  regional interests at the federal level 

and fostering public-private partnerships. In particular, companies like Noril’sk Nikel’ and Fosagro 

are  encouraged  to  invest  in  urban  infrastructure  improvements. A similar scenario is unfolding in 

the Arkhangel’sk Oblast’ and Karelia Republic, where the involvement of governors at the regional 

level  also  stands  at  a  high  level:  93  per  cent  and  75  per  cent,  respectively.  The  share  of  a  Head 

mentioned in the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) is 53 per cent. 

Figure 18. Frequency of the unique mentions of the policy actors, units 

Source: author’s work 

Certainly,  such  inferences  may  be  somewhat  prejudiced  due  to  the  preponderance  of 

publications  originating  from  the  Komi  Republic.  Nonetheless,  the  increased  prominence  of 

regional  authorities  in  media  discussions  regarding  population  decline  reflects  their  greater 

engagement in addressing urban shrinkage issues. 

The  relative  autonomy  of  the  regional  authorities  from  the  Head  of  the  Komi  Republic 

contributes to the coherence of a policy. Urban shrinkage was first mentioned in 2016, when it was 

suggested to relocate the residents of towns surrounding Vorkuta into the core of the city, providing 

them  with  accommodation  and  employment  within  the  confines  of  the  reduced  area.  Eight  years 

later,  the  region  has  advanced to the stage of revising federal legislation to address the challenges 

faced by the northern cities of the Komi Republic. 

45 

 
 
According to him [the Head of the Komi Republic], these funds should not be allocated 

for citizens relocating to other regions, but rather for resettlement within the Republic. 

‘The  primary  objective  [...]  is  to  retain  people  in  the  region  and  create  an  attractive 

environment for them to remain. This includes improving working and living conditions 

locally,  such  as  providing  opportunities  for  towns  residents  to  find  employment  in 

Vorkuta through the creation of new jobs’ [Head of the Komi Republic, 2016]. 

We have already put forward a proposal for a law on the preservation of vacant housing, 

for  this  is  a  matter  of  federal  competence.  I  believe  that  with  the  backing  of  the 

senators, we shall arrive at a legislative resolution to this issue. [Head of the Republic of 

Komi, 2024]. 

Meanwhile,  in  the  Murmansk  Oblast’,  a  dichotomy  of  perspectives  on  the  concept  of 

shrinkage  emerged  between  the  former  and  current  governors,  significantly  influencing  the 

trajectory of regional policy in a relatively brief timeframe. In the year 2019, there was a perception 

that  fighting  population  loss  was  not  a  viable  strategy.  However,  by  2021,  it  had  evolved  into  a 

critical  priority  for  the  region’s  development.  This  transformation  can  be  attributed  to  the 

Murmansk Oblast’ role as a frontrunner in shaping the agenda of Arctic development. 

There  is  no  need  to  fight it [population outflow]. People came here [to the Murmansk 

Oblast’] for some reason, they came to work, to build. There is no such need now, and 

there  is  no  point  in  living  here  just  to  live  here  [Governor  of  the  Murmansk Oblast’, 

2019]. 

The  key  issue  on  the  Arctic  agenda  for  northern  countries  today  is  the  fight  against 

population outflow, and the Murmansk Oblast’ has created a strategic plan ‘In the North 

— to live! 2.0’ [Governor of the Murmansk Oblast’, 2021] 

With regard to the other regions that are most active in media, it is just stated that population 

decline is awful and must be combated. However, the specific proposals are not articulated in their 

statements. Thus, we can observe two parallel discourses on population decline in the Arctic, with 

the more rational approach of the Komi Republic standing out. Nonetheless, this approach is based 

on addressing financial issues rather than focusing on population concerns. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  critical  inference  that  must  be  made  in light of the interactions between policy actors is 

that the issue of population decline is characterised by a marked intersectoral and multilevel nature, 

irrespective  of  whether  the  strategy  involves  growth  or  shrinkage.  In  the  context  of  increased 

political  centralisation,  particularly  evident in the period from 2018 to 2020, responsibility for the 

development  of  shrinking  cities  has  been  shifted from the local to the regional and federal levels. 

This shift is evident in the statement by the mayor of Vorkuta, as quoted below: 

Together with the Government of the Komi Republic, we continue to justify to Moscow 

that  the  amount  of  funding  for  Vorkuta  should  be  increased  several  times  [...] 

Optimisation  and  shrinkage  programs  are  not  able  to  achieve  significant  savings.  We 

need  money  and  investments.  We  also  need  new jobs, and new tax agents, so that the 

city  budget  grows.  The  magnitude  of  this  challenge  is  at  the  federal  level  [Mayor  of 

Vorkuta City, 2024] 

Urban development under shrinkage processes is often a costly endeavour, which raises the 

question at the federal level: Why invest in decline, economic stagnation, or low growth when there 

are opportunities for profitable investment? 

4.2 Urban Shrinkage Discourse in Strategic Planning Documents 

4.2.1 Quantitative Perspective of Discourse 

For  quantitative  part  of  analysis,  the  shrinking  words  (SW),  which  were  already  used  when 

uploading  news  publication  content,  were  employed.  Due  to  the  absence  of  explicit discourse on 

urban shrinkage in state programs, only socio-economic development strategies were considered. A 

total  of  75  socio-economic  development  strategies  were  examined, and the information regarding 

these documents is presented in Table 10. 

Table 10. Number of socio-economic development strategies by territorial level 

Previous 

Current 

Total 

Federal 

Regional 

Municipal 

Total 

6 

7 

19 

32 

47 

5 

11 

27 

43 

11 

18 

46 

75 

Source: author’s work 

 
 
 
 
All  75  documents  were  coded  by  population  decline  mentions.  The  following  terms  were 

employed  for  this  purpose:  ottok  (outflow),  snizhenie,  ubyl’  (decline),  sokrashenie  (decrease), 

depopulyatsiya  (depopulation),  spad,  padenie  (fall),  and  szhatie  (shrinkage).  ‘Decline’  and 

‘decrease’  words  neutrally  describe  population  loss,  while  ‘depopulation’  and  ‘fall’  show  more 

dramatic  dynamics.  Shrinkage  is  a  specific  term  used  to  describe  changes  in  urban  space. 

Additionally,  references  to  ‘migration’  or  ‘natural’  were considered to determine the predominant 

nature of the population decline.  

A  total  of  1,673  references  (codes)  to  shrinkage  processes  were  received  for  quantitative 

analysis.  Federal  documents  accounted  for  108  codes,  regional  documents  for  390  codes,  and 

municipal documents for 1,175. All codes were categorised by territorial level and document status, 

with the final table provided in Table 1 of Appendix 4. 

Descriptive  statistics  have been provided for each level. Notwithstanding the varying word 

count, which is contingent upon the specific documents, it is evident that there are two times fewer 

mentions of words describing shrinkage per document (see Table 11). It can be attributed to the fact 

that  documents  previously  adopted  regarding  the  socio-economic  development of federal districts 

primarily  focused  on  addressing  population  decline,  particularly  in  the  North-Western  District. 

Importantly, this district encompasses Arctic regions such as Murmansk Oblast’, Karelia Republic, 

Arkhangel’sk  Oblast,  and  the  Komi  Republic,  which  significantly  contribute  to  the  discourse  on 

population  decline  in  the  media  sphere.  Interestingly,  the  Fundamentals  of  State  Policy  in  the 

Arctic, adopted more than 15 years ago, fails to mention population loss. 

Table 11. Descriptive statistics on federal strategies SW mentioning  

Territorial 
level 

Status 

Number of 
SW 

Mean 

Median 

Min 

Max 

Federal  

Previous 

Current 

32 

76 

12,7 

6,4 

13 

4 

0 

1 

29 

19 

Standard 
deviation 

11,7 

7,1 

Source: author’s work 

At  the  regional level, there has been a simultaneous increase in both the overall number of 

shrinking words and the average number of words per strategic planning document (see Table 12). 

The  highest  peak  in  the  number  of  words  was  previously  observed  in  the Murmansk Oblast’ (56 

words), but now it is in the Yamal-Nenets Autonomous District (52 words). 

Some  of the regions with the most stable demographic situation, such as the Yamal-Nenets 

Autonomous  Okrug,  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  and  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug,  have 

48 

 
 
responded  to  the  issue  of shrinkage and potential challenges in their socio-economic development 

strategies.  In  general,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  19,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  mentions  of 

shrinkage processes in all regions, except for the Murmansk Oblast’ and Krasnoyarsk Kray, where 

there  has  been  a  decrease.  The  variability  in  values  (standard  deviation)  remains  significant, 

indicating a high degree of heterogeneity in documents related to population decline. 

Table 12. Descriptive statistics on regional strategies SW mentioning  

Territorial 
level 

Status 

Number of 
SW 

Mean 

Median 

Min 

Max 

Regional 

Previous 

124 

17,7 

Current 

266 

24,2 

13 

23 

0 

10 

56 

52 

Standard 
deviation 

19,0 

12,1 

Figure 19. SW mentions in regional current and previous strategies, units  

Source: author’s work 

Source: author’s work 

The heterogeneity of documents at the municipal level is even more pronounced, and it has 

been increasing over time, in contrast to documents at the regional and federal levels. An absolute 

record  for  the  number  of  mentions  of  shrinkage  terms  can  be  observed  in  the  socio-economic 

development strategy of Vorkuta, in the Komi Republic, containing a remarkable 106 references to 

shrinkage (see Table 13). It is crucial that both in municipalities and in regions, there has been a rise 

in the frequency of mention of shrinkage processes. 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 13. Descriptive statistics on municipal strategies SW mentioning  

Territorial 
level 

Status 

Number of 
SW 

Mean 

Median 

Min 

Max 

Standard 
deviation 

Municipal 

Previous 

409 

21,5 

Current 

766 

27,4 

18 

23 

3 

1 

53 

14,0 

106 

23,0 

Source: author’s work 

Concerning  the  mentions  of  population  decline  in  previous  documents,  migration  decline 

accounts  for 22 per cent of occurrences of shrinkage terms, while natural decline constitutes 8 per 

cent,  as  it  is  presented  in  Table  14.  In  the  current  versions,  both  indicators  have  increased by an 

average  of  one  document.  Migration  processes  continue  to  describe  the  population  decline in the 

Arctic region, although the indicator for natural decline has increased to a greater extent. 

Table 14. Characteristics of population decline representation  

Migration loss, units  Migration loss, %  Natural loss, units 

Natural loss, % 

Previous 

Current 

134 

258 

22 

24,2 

51 

121 

8,4 

11,4 

Source: author’s work 

4.2.1 Policy Change Through the Arctic Shrinkage Discourse  

For  qualitative  analysis  purposes,  goal-setting  texts  from  strategies  and  state  programs  were 

examined.  The  frequency  of  specific  words  used  in  setting  goals was analysed, the discourses on 

shrinkage were described, and the policy measures contained in state programs designed to address 

population  decline  were  explored.  Table  15 presents the most prevalent words in strategies across 

different generations, excluding those that appeared fewer than ten times. Notably, there has been a 

significant increase in the use of terms such as ‘comfort’ and ‘environment’. 

50 

 
 
 
 
Table 15. Frequency of words in goal-setting of Socio-Economic Development Strategies 

% 

16 

№  Word 

Non- 
current 

Current  Change, 

№  Word 

1  Ekonomicheski

25 

30 

y (Economic) 

2  Kachestvo 

(Quality) 

3  Naseleniye 

(Population) 

20 

28 

28,5 

23 

30 

23 

7  Arktika 
(Arctic) 

8  Povysheniye 
(Increase) 

9  Komfort 
(Comfort) 

4  Razvitiye 

29 

33 

12 

10  Sreda 

(Development) 

5  Zhizn’ (Life) 

21 

28 

25 

(Environment) 

11  Ustoychivyy 
(Sustainable) 

6  Obespecheniye 
(Security) 

16 

20 

20 

12  Zhil’ye 

(Housing) 

Non- 
current 

Current  Change, 

% 

7 

16 

56,3 

20 

24 

16,7 

2 

3 

9 

9 

13 

84,6 

16 

81,2 

13 

30,7 

11 

18,2 

Source: author’s work 

To  comprehend  the  context  of  population  decline  discourse  in  the  Arctic,  it  is  crucial  to 

discuss how this issue is represented in high-level policy documents. The new Spatial Development 

Strategy  introduces  a  specific  indicator  for  the  Russian  Arctic  that  aims  to  maintain  the  ratio  of 

permanent  residents  at  the  level  it  was  in  2023.  Additionally,  the  target  is  set  at  100  per cent by 

2030  (Government  of  the  Russian  Federation,  2024).  This  suggests that the population decline in 

the Arctic must be stopped. There is no such indicator in the previous version of the Strategy.  

The  issue  of  population  loss  in  the  Arctic  region  has  been  previously  proposed  to  be 

addressed  by  creating  favourable  conditions  and  incentives  aimed  at  reducing  migration  outflow 

and attracting professionals to territories experiencing labour shortages (Government of the Russian 

Federation, 2019). Currently, the emphasis is shifting towards infrastructure development, which is 

expected to stop the population migration from cities, which play a role as the major service centres 

towards peripheral areas within the Arctic. 

The issue of population decline is also addressed in the current Foundations of State Policy 

in  the  Arctic  Zone  of  the  Russian  Federation  (President  of  the  Russian  Federation,  2020a).  The 

document  underscores  that  the  depopulation  of  the  Arctic  constitutes  a  critical  threat  to  national 

security.  In  contrast,  the  previous  document  failed  to  articulate  any  policy  regarding  the  issue  of 

population decline.  

The  discourse  presented  in  Socio-Economic Development Strategies of the Arctic has also 

transformed.  Previously,  population  decline  was  identified  as  a  crucial  factor  affecting  the 

51 

 
socio-economic  evolution  of  this  macroregion.  It  was  particularly  emphasised that the outflow of 

highly skilled labour poses a significant obstacle to the advancement of the Arctic (President of the 

Russian  Federation,  2013).  At  present,  demographic  decline  represents  a  significant  threat  to  the 

sustainability  of  Arctic development (President of the Russian Federation, 2020b). In the realm of 

social  objectives,  the  emphasis  on  goal-setting  has  shifted  specifically  in  the  domains  of 

infrastructure  and  housing.  Whereas  previously,  efforts  were  focused  on  modernising  social 

infrastructure  and  housing  to  prevent  population  exodus,  the  current  emphasis  lies  in  creating  a 

modern and comfortable urban environment, coupled with state support for housing construction in 

the Arctic. 

The  Socio-Economic  Development  State  Program  of  the  Arctic  Zone  has  evolved  into  a 

more  ambitious  initiative,  shifting  its  focus  from  merely  enhancing  socio-economic conditions to 

fostering  accelerated  economic  growth.  This  shift  necessitates  the  creation  of  new  jobs 

(Government of the Russian Federation 2014b; 2021). The current State Programs on Housing and 

on  Economic  Development  of  the  Russian  Federation  consist of the aforementioned objectives in 

their  goal-setting:  the  augmentation  of  the  annual  quantity  of  commissioned  housing,  the 

enhancement of the urban environment, and the establishment of new jobs to bolster the capacity of 

regional  economies.  Additionally,  there  is  a  focus  on  fostering  employment  within  small  and 

medium-sized enterprises (Government of the Russian Federation, 2014a; 2017). 

Indeed, all these documents delineate the specific focus in which it is necessary to consider 

the  issue  of  demographic  decline  in  federal  Arctic  entities  and  municipal  entities.  This  paper 

presents an in-depth analysis of the strategic initiatives and governmental programs implemented by 

the  Arctic  regions and their municipalities. The following is an analysis of the strategies and state 

programs of the regions and municipalities of the Arctic Zone. 

Arctic Regions. Previously, population decline presented a significant challenge, primarily in 

the form of an impending labour shortage in the economy. This issue is highlighted in the strategic 

documents  of  the  Komi  Republic,  Murmansk  Oblast’,  Karelia  Republic,  and  Yamal-Nenets 

Autonomous  District.  Strengthening  demographic and migration policies has emerged as a crucial 

measure  for  these  regions  (Government  of  the  Karelia  Republic  2007;  Government  of  the  Komi 

Republic, 2006; Government of the Murmansk Oblast’, 2010). On the contrary, the strategy of the 

Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug emphasises the complete absence of such an issue, as there has 

been  an  influx of workers into the region. The Krasnoyarsk Kray separates the northern part from 

the rest of its territory, and the decline in the economically redundant population in the Far North is 

a  consequence  of  deliberate  policy  implemented  by  the  region  (Government  of  the  Krasnoyarsk 

Kray, 2013a). 

52 

 
A  more  nuanced  perspective  on  depopulation  is  offered  in  the  contemporary  regional 

socio-economic  strategies.  The  consequences  of  population decrease have become more accurate: 

problems  with  (1)  employment  in  the  single-industry  towns  (Komi  Republic,  Khanty-Mansi 

Autonomous  Okrug);  (2)  vacant  housing  (Komi  Republic,  Murmansk  Oblast’);  (3)  excess 

infrastructure  (Yamal-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug);  labour  loss  (Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’,  Karelia 

Republic); (4) tension in the provision of social services (for instance, Sakha Republic (Yakutia)).  

Consequently,  among  the  measures  to  be  taken,  economic  diversification  stands  out, 

involving both federal and extra-budgetary investments. This includes efforts to reduce the cost of 

maintaining  vacant  housing,  as  well as targeted measures aimed at attracting and retaining human 

resources (for example, Government of the Murmansk Oblast’, 2013a). Particularly, there is a focus 

on  fostering  tourism  and cultivating a favourable perception of the region (for example, Governor 

of the Archangel’sk Oblast’, 2019). 

As  can  be  inferred  from  the  preceding  paragraph,  the  discourse  on  population  decline  is 

largely  shaped  by  the  regions  that  are  most  prominently  represented  in  media  discourse:  Komi 

Republic,  Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’,  Murmansk  Oblast’,  Karelia  Republic,  Sakha Republic (Yakutia). 

The Yamal-Nenets and Khanty-Mansi autonomous okrugs are also mentioned here. These regions, 

which  have  experienced  steady  population  growth  for  a  long  period,  are  now  facing  increasing 

challenges  in  their  mono-resource  cities.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug, 

Krasnoyarsk Kray, and the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug are not included in this discourse.  

The  strategies  of  these  regions  reveal  that  for  small  mining  regions  such  as  the  Nenets 

Autonomous  Okrug and Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, the constant population fluctuation related 

to the industrial development of the Arctic is a normal phenomenon. Krasnoyarsk Kray is primarily 

concerned  with  the  Krasnoyarsk  agglomeration  in  the  southern  part  of  the  region,  where  the 

population is concentrated. The depopulation in the northern areas of this region is seen as a natural 

process. 

Arctic municipal entities. Urban development has previously been viewed primarily through 

an  economic  lens  in  municipal  goal-setting:  ‘The  establishment  of  a  competitive  economy’ 

(Purovskiy  Municipal  District  Duma,  2011),  ‘Increasing  investment  attractiveness’  (Segezha 

Municipal  District  Council,  2015),  ‘Ensuring  economic  growth’  (Administration  of  the  Apatity, 

2016).  Economic  measures  also  prevailed:  ‘Adaptation  [of  the  economy]  to  the  recession’  (Inta 

Urban District Council, 2014), ‘Jobs creation’ (Kola Municipal District Council of Deputies, 2015), 

‘Development  of  a  municipal  program  to  reduce  the  migrant  workers’  outflow’  (Beloyarskiy 

Municipal District Duma, 2014). 

53 

 
In  the  excerpts  that  represent  the  issues  of  local-level  shrinkage,  the  words  ‘trudovoy’ 

(labour) (7 units), ‘obrazovanie’ (education) (7 units), and ‘zdravoohranenie’ (healthcare) (5 units) 

stand  out.  This  overall  pattern  highlights  both  the  sectors  that  are most in need of labour and the 

underlying issue itself: labour is a crucial component in the advancement of the Arctic cities. 

The process of goal-setting at the local level has undergone a significant transformation and 

expansion,  with  a  shift  towards  prioritising  the  urban  environment  with  economic  attractiveness. 

The  focus  has  shifted to ‘Creating comfortable living conditions for the population’ (Kandalaksha 

Municipal District Council of Deputies, 2018), ‘Creating a comfortable space for the human capital 

development’ (Beloyarskiy Municipal District Duma, 2023), ‘The preservation of human potential 

through  the  creation  of  a  comfortable  living  environment’  (Turukhanskiy  Municipal  District 

Strategy Project, 2020). Thus, comfort also becomes an important factor in population retention. 

The  measures  outlined  in  the  documents  provide  further  confirmation  of  this  trend. 

Measures aimed at creating a comfortable environment are prevalent, with 15 instances of mention. 

Support  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  also  enjoys  widespread  recognition,  with  16 

instances  of  mention.  Healthcare remains a priority, with 9 instances of mention, while education, 

as  a  crucial  aspect  in  preserving  human  capital,  has  seen  a  decline,  with  only  3  instances  of 

mention. This suggests that in shrinking cities, the discourse is shifting towards a focus on fostering 

a  robust  economy  and  creating  a  comfortable  environment,  thereby  ensuring  a  high  standard  of 

living for the population and preventing its outflow. 

The issue of population decline has become more pronounced in recent times, as evidenced 

by the increased frequency of shrinkage words mentioned. Whereas previously, the population loss 

was  primarily  associated  with social (demographic) and economic aspects, it has now extended to 

encompass a broader range of sectors, as exemplified by the housing sector. 

Following  the  analysis  of  previous  generation  socio-economic  development  strategies, the 

following discourse emerges: Population decline as a threat to the economic processes termination. 

The retention or attraction of the workforce is essential. The population outflow results in a decline 

in  the  quality  of  human  capital,  necessitating  economic  interventions  that  enable  both  the  local 

workforce  to  remain  in the Arctic and facilitate the integration of newcomers into the region. The 

analysis of current generation socio-economic development strategies leads to such a discourse: To 

stop  the  population decline at all costs. This implies a multifaceted approach to address this issue 

from all possible sectors simultaneously.  

54 

 
 
 
 
Discourse in Housing: Comfortisation Turn for Urban Growth  

The  indicator  of  annual  housing  commissioning  in  forecasts  is  not  presented  in all strategies and 

state  programs  of  the  constituent  entities  of the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation (Appendix 

5).  This  fact  makes  it  impossible  to  determine  whether  the  indicators  of  development  at  the 

subnational level have improved or deteriorated. It should be noted that regional state programs on 

housing  do  not  take  into  account  population  dynamics,  irrespective  of  the  approval  time  of  the 

documents.  State  programs  on  housing  in  the  federal  entities,  as  a  rule,  focus  on  pragmatic 

objectives  related  to  relocating  residents  from  unsuitable  emergency  housing  and  providing 

accommodation  for  various  vulnerable  social  groups. Nevertheless, it is worth paying attention to 

the goals set and the specific measures proposed for implementation. Housing plays a crucial role in 

the  Arctic  region,  where  poor  living  conditions  contribute  to  a  lack  of  attractiveness  for  the 

population. 

Following  an  analysis  of  the  planning  documents  of  the  preceding  period,  a  dominant 

discourse  (1)  ‘Housing  and  utility  security  under  extreme  conditions’  has  been  identified.  The 

safety  of  individuals  residing  in  the  Arctic  is  of  paramount  importance.  This  is  accomplished 

through  the  enhancement  of  the  dependability  of  engineering infrastructure systems (Government 

of the Murmansk Oblast’, 2013b), increasing the security level of citizens through improving their 

living conditions (house repairs) (Government of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, 2017). 

As  a  result  of  the  analysis  of  strategic  planning  documents  of  the  current  generation, two 

enlarged codes were identified: 

(1) The enhancement of living standards through the expansion of construction. Previously, 

there were only sporadic indications of the need for housing construction, but now this has become 

the most important objective of housing policy on the sub-national level. 

(2)  Comfort  and  urban  environment improvement as the primary impetus for development. 

‘Comfortable housing’ and ‘comfortable environment’ have become firmly established in the policy 

formulation,  particularly  in  the  context  of  the  establishment  of  the  ‘Housing  and  Urban 

Environment’ national project (2018-2024).  

This  analysis  underscores  the  trajectory  of  policy  at the federal level. Notwithstanding the 

fact  that  state  programs  are  devoid  of  any  ideological  underpinnings,  the  discernible  discourses 

indicate  a paradigm shift from a focus on security to a prioritisation of convenience. The realm of 

housing,  which  once  served  as  a  bastion  of  ensuring  basic  human  necessities,  has  evolved into a 

domain of expansion and growth. 

55 

 
 
At  present,  the  housing  sector  in  the  Murmansk  Oblast’  is  undergoing  a  period  of 

expansion  and  advancement.  The  rate  of  housing  construction  is  on  the  rise,  and 

collaborative  efforts  are  being  made  with  developers  to  foster  the  construction  of 

apartment buildings [Government of the Murmansk Oblast’, 2020a] 

In  five  Arctic  regions,  specific  supporting  measures  for  shrinkage  response  have  been 

identified. It is remarkable that these measures are designed to address utilitarian issues or provide 

financial benefits to various social groups with the goal of attracting them to the Arctic. 

The  Murmansk  Oblast’  had  previously  implemented  subsidies  aimed  at  compensating  for 

the  revenue  shortfall  experienced  by  resource-providing  organisations  (Government  of  the 

Murmansk Oblast’, 2013b); 

The Sakha Republic (Yakutia) had provided financial assistance for the purchase of housing 

for teachers and medical professionals who have devoted 5 years of their service in the Arctic and 

remote  municipalities  organisations  of  the  Republic  (The  Head  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia), 

2017)); 

The Komi Republic provides financial assistance to municipal entities for the resettlement of 

underpopulated  areas,  including the renovation of vacant municipal housing units (Government of 

the  Komi  Republic,  2019b).  The  Komi  Republic has previously collaborated with the Ministry of 

Construction  of  the  Russian  Federation  to  secure  federal  funding  aimed  at  optimisation  of  the 

efficiency of Vorkuta’s heating system (Government of the Komi Republic, 2012a); 

The Arkhangel’sk Oblast’ extended financial support to young families aimed at facilitating 

the  acquisition  or  construction  of  residential  property  within  the  region  (Government  of  the 

Arckhangel’sk Oblast’, 2013a); 

The Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous District grants subsidies for the engineering infrastructure 

projects  development  aimed  at  providing  land  plots  for  the  construction  of  individual  houses 

intended for families with three or more children (Government of the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous 

Okrug, 2013a). 

The measures implemented in the Krasnoyarsk Kray are designed to facilitate the relocation 

of  unviable  settlements.  Specifically,  a  subsidy  is  allocated  to  the  budget  of  the  Taimyr 

Dolgano-Nenets District to provide social assistance to retirees relocating outside the district for the 

acquisition  or  construction  of  residential  property. Additionally, support is provided to the Evenki 

District  for  providing  social  benefits  to  individuals  relocating  outside  its  borders  to  purchase  or 

construct housing (Government of the Krasnoyarsk Kray, 2013b). 

56 

 
 
The  support  measures  that  have  been  proposed  only  serve  to  reinforce  the  narratives  that 

were  identified  during  the  analysis  of  media  publication:  in  order  to  promote  the  shrinking 

territories  development,  individuals  must  either  be  enticed  with  financial  incentives,  retained 

through such incentives, or relocated in order to conserve budgetary resources. 

Discourse in Economy: New Jobs as an Intangible Remedy Against Shrinkage 

As  previously  stated,  the  economic  sphere  continues  to  be  the most significant factor influencing 

demographic  trends  in  regions  and cities. Consequently, there have been no substantial alterations 

in  the  discourse  on  the  regional  level.  Some  of  the  concepts  remain  fundamental  principles: 

‘Favourable  business  environment’  (Government  of  the  Murmansk  Oblast’,  2013c),  ‘competitive 

industry’  (Government  of  the  Komi  Republic,  2019c), ‘sustained economic growth’ (Government 

of  the  Arckhangel’sk  Oblast’,  2019).  The  economic  growth  stimulation  in  territories  is  a  critical 

area of focus for state authorities in the entities of the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation. In the 

context of shrinking regions, this endeavour is directed towards the preservation of the population. 

The  analysis  of  media  publications  has  already  revealed  that  job  creation  is  a  critical 

indicator for the government, as it aims to address the issue of population decline in Arctic regions. 

The emergence of new jobs is expected to result from the diversification of economic activities and 

the establishment of novel industries, serving both to retain and entice the population. 

Nonetheless, in the analysis of state programs of federal Arctic Entities, it becomes evident 

that  the  indicator  of  ‘newly  created  jobs’  is  not  forecasted.  Consequently,  it  is  challenging  to 

envision a comparative analysis of quantitative indicators that characterise regional plans for urban 

development. It is worth noting that in certain regions, previous planning documents do incorporate 

the estimation of job creation for the forecast period; however, these projections are linked to small 

and medium-sized enterprises that receive governmental support or to residents of the Arctic Zone 

(for instance, Government of the Komi Republic, 2012b). Specific indicators are presented only in 

the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray:  ‘The  number  of  high-performance  jobs  created  is  40  units  annually’ 

(Government  of  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray,  2013c)  and  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia):  ‘Creation  of 

136,000 new jobs by 2020’ (The Head of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia), 2011)). 

As  a  general  rule,  regions  use  the  job  creation  indicator  as  a  benchmark  for  awarding 

subsidies to local governments to support small- and medium-sized businesses (for example, in the 

Murmansk Oblast’ and the Karelia Republic). While such assistance is crucial for local economies, 

it  does  not  significantly  contribute  to  the  overall  economic  development  of  the  regions. 

Consequently, regions primarily exert their influence indirectly. 

57 

 
 
Particularly  noteworthy  are  the  specific measures of economic support implemented in the 

context of shrinkage in the Komi Republic, Murmansk Oblast’, and Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. 

Of these, the Komi Republic stands out for its systematic approach to addressing shrinkage issues in 

problem territories. 

The Komi Republic grants financial assistance to municipal entities in order to mitigate the 

effects  of 

the  single-industry  enterprise  closure  within  resource-dependent  municipalities 

(Government  of  the  Komi  Republic,  2019c).  Previously,  there  was  also  an  initiative  aimed  at 

assisting in the development or rehabilitation of infrastructure assets essential for the realisation of 

new investment ventures in single-industry towns (Government of the Komi Republic, 2012b). 

In the Murmansk Oblast’, there was a program aimed at supporting small and medium-sized 

enterprises  to  foster  their growth in single-industry towns (Government of the Murmansk Oblast’, 

2013b). 

In  the  Chukotka  Autonomous  District,  financial  incentives  were  previously  provided  to 

attract  workers  from  other  regions  of  the  Russian  Federation  (Government  of  the  Chukotka 

Autonomous Okrug, 2013). 

58 

 
 
Chapter 5. Discussion 

This  chapter is devoted to defining the role of urban shrinkage discourse in multilevel governance 

in the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation. The role is determined by the interplay between how 

the  policy  is  perceived  (formulated  in  news  media  publications)  and  how  it  is  subsequently 

translated  into  action  through  strategic  planning  (formulated  in  strategic  planning  documents)  at 

three levels of governance. 

The  discourses  in  the  media  were  analysed  from  a  multilevel  perspective,  revealing  how 

policy  regarding  the  urban  population  decline  in  the  Arctic  region  is  formulated.  One  of  the key 

findings  is  that  depopulation  is  closely  linked  to  external  economic  factors,  however,  urban 

shrinkage problems and responses are concentrated in the housing sector. The distinctive feature of 

the  Arctic  context  is  that  the  development  of  its  cities  is  contingent  upon  market  demand  for 

extracted resources and industrial output, resulting in job instability and fluctuating populations. 

As  can  be  inferred  from  a  QCA  of  media  publications,  to  prevent  the  population  from 

leaving  and  to  attract  the  needed  professionals,  it  is  essential  to  provide  them  with  unique 

opportunities that cannot be found elsewhere. For instance, offering them the chance to acquire new 

housing at an exceptionally low interest rate compared to the national average (Providing financial 

benefits). Moreover, to maintain a stable population, living standards in the Arctic cities must be at 

least equivalent to those in the central parts of Russia (Comfortisation). The impulse to develop new 

housing and infrastructure as a response to the economic downturn may be attributed to the fact that 

such  initiatives  are often perceived as more feasible than efforts to make the Arctic region market 

competitive. This narrative bears a striking resemblance to the Soviet approach, where vast amounts 

of  housing  were  constructed  for  migrants  who  subsequently  departed,  leaving  behind  a  host  of 

challenges for the Arctic cities. 

The  discourse  on  urban  shrinkage  in  the  media  is  characterised  by  inconsistency  and 

ambiguity.  Alongside  efforts  to  create  conditions  conducive  to  population  growth,  there  exists  a 

prominent discourse regarding compactisation — the process of condensing a shrinking population 

to address an acute issue (Compactisation). The prominence of this discourse within the media can 

be  attributed  to  the  promotion  of  this  issue  at  the  highest  levels,  resulting  from  impediments  in 

federal legislation. 

It is worth emphasising that all these discourses are predominantly shaped by three distinct 

regions:  the  Murmansk  Oblast’,  the  Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’  and  the  Komi  Republic.  The  first  two 

regions are the main competitors in the struggle for a flagship in the Arctic, they include the largest 

cities  in  the  macroregion  —  Murmansk  and  Arkhangel’sk.  These  regions  are  associated  with 

59 

 
Russia’s aspirations to transform the Arctic into a new hub of growth, prosperity, and comfort. The 

frequent  mention  of  population  decline  in  Murmansk  Oblast’  is  indicative  of  the  regional 

government’s  focus on fighting this problem. In contrast, for the Komi Republic, Arctic territories 

represent the main pain rather than a source of development. The problems accumulated in the most 

depopulating  Arctic  cities  such  as  Vorkuta  (–3  per  cent  per  annum)  and  Inta  (–4.2  per  cent  per 

annum) force the regional government to take an active part in their solution. 

The  remaining  regions  are  largely  eclipsed  by  the  discussion  of  this  issue  for a variety of 

reasons. Demographic decline may be not a critical challenge that necessitates intervention. This is 

why there is a dearth of news media publications on population loss in regions such as the Nenets 

Autonomous  Okrug,  Yamal-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug,  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug,  and 

Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug.  These  regions  have  distinct  and  more  recent  histories  of  urban 

development compared to the cities in the Murmansk Oblast’, the Arkhangel’sk Oblast’, the Komi 

Republic,  which  have  been  the  subject  of  extensive  media  coverage,  and  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray. 

However,  Krasnoyarsk  Kray  also  intervenes  in  its  cities'  lives  without  media  attention,  and  the 

population decline in Arctic territories is a manageable process in this region. 

An  examination  of  the  strategic  planning  documents  also  reveals  that  federal  strategy 

establishes a blueprint for action in the Arctic. The primary objective at the federal level is to halt 

population  decline  at  all costs, as the population is critical to the survival of this macroregion and 

the security of the nation of Russia as a whole. It is at the federal level that initiatives are proposed 

to stimulate housing construction in the Arctic and jobs creation for the influx of new residents. 

The  notable shifts in discourse at the regional level, associated with the expansion of areas 

of influence on demographic dynamics, can be directly linked to the imperative to stop population 

decline through any means available. However, regional policies can vary significantly and exhibit 

remarkable  adaptability.  This  was  evident in the cases of the Komi Republic and the Krasnoyarsk 

Kray,  which  prioritised  the  urban  shrinkage  of  Northern  areas  in  their  policy  frameworks.  This 

suggests that not all regions subscribe to a uniform Arctic agenda set by the federal government, but 

rather prioritise addressing their specific challenges. Typically, there is no autonomous goal-setting 

at the local level. Rather, it is contingent upon the objectives set by the regional government and the 

minor  measures  it  can  implement  independently.  Consequently, the dynamic relationship between 

discursive  policy  formulation  in  news  media  publications  and  strategic  planning  documents  is 

illustrated in Table 16. 

60 

 
 
 
 
Table 16. Comparison of urban shrinkage discourse in media and planning documents 

Media discourse 

Policy responses 
(discourse) 

Providing 
financial 
benefits 

Comfortisation 

Compactisation 

Problem 
representation 
(discourse) 

Shrinkage is a 
consequence of 
economic 
factors, 

but its impact is 
particularly 
acute in the 
housing sector, 

and the 
solutions lie 
primarily within 
the housing 
sector. 

Federal 
level 

Regional 
level 

Municipal 
level 

Other actors 

Strategic planning discourse 

Problem 
representation 
(discourse) 

The population 
decline is no 
longer merely a 
social issue to 
the Arctic, but a 
menace to 
national 
security; 

Stop the 
population 
decline at all 
costs 

Policy responses 
(discourse) 

The actors’ role 

Discourse in 
Housing: 
Comfortisation 
Turn for Urban 
Growth; 

Discourse in 
Economy:  
New Jobs as an 
Intangible 
Remedy Against 
Shrinkage 

Create a 
framework for 
policy 
responses; 

Create federal 
support 
measures aimed 
at accelerating 
development in 
the Arctic 

(Un) Solves the 
problems of 
cities in the 
context of 
shrinkage  

Policy 
recipients, 
practically do 
not adopt 

Act as important 
actors for the 
economic 
well-being of 
shrinking 
territories 

Source: author’s work 

The actors’ role 

Report on 
priority support 
measures for the 
geostrategic 
region; 

Set the goal for 
Governors to 
reduce the 
population 
decline. 

Generate the 
most visible 
discourse on the 
issue of urban 
shrinkage; 

The main 
policymakers 
and policy 
guides to 
shrinking cities. 

Policy 
recipients; 

Engage in 
deliberations at 
forums of 
various levels 
on pressing 
matters 

Сontribute to 
the master plans 
development; 

Engage in 
educational 
processes;  

Establish 
industrial and 
civil 
infrastructure 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The research, based on qualitative data, reveals that the current discourse on urban shrinkage 

in  the  Arctic  is  not  representative  of  the  entire  region  and  is  predominantly  shaped  by  a  limited 

number  of  key  actors  who  exert  a  significant  influence  on  Arctic  development.  Specifically,  this 

discourse  is  primarily  driven  by  federal  actors,  with  support  from  the  Murmansk  Oblast’  and 

Arkhangel’sk Oblast’. Importantly, there has been a noticeable increase in discourse on population 

loss  over the past decade, leading to the assumption that the entire Arctic region should be guided 

by a paradigm focused on fighting population decline. However, it is important to acknowledge that 

Arctic  policies  are  formulated  by  10  federal  entities  that  adhere  to  the  prevailing  discourse  of 

development.  These  regions,  as  outlined  in  their  respective  documents,  prioritise  construction 

expansion, a comfortable urban environment creation, and jobs generation. 

It is noteworthy that the compactisaton discourse, which permeates the media, does not find 

its  reflection  in  the  strategic  planning  documents  of  regional  policy,  except  for  the  outdated 

Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Murmansk  Oblast’,  which was in action for only 3 

years  (Government  of  Murmansk  Oblast’,  2010).  This  issue  is  also  mentioned  in  the  strategic 

documents  of  the  cities  of  the  Komi  Republic,  such  as  Vorkuta  (Vorkuta  Urban  District  Council, 

2020) and Inta (Inta Urban District Council, 2020).  

Analysis  of  state  programs  showed  that  urban  shrinkage  remains  primarily  a  local  or,  at 

most,  regional  issue.  The  case  of  the  Komi  Republic  warrants  special  attention,  as  the  discourse 

surrounding  the  compactisation  of  northern  cities  in  this  region  has  gained  prominence  in  media 

coverage,  making  the  problem  of  urban  shrinkage  more  salient.  Nonetheless,  the  discussion  of 

urban shrinkage at the federal level serves as a manifestation of the imperative need to find a swift 

resolution to a pressing issue, rather than representing an alternative model for urban development. 

This  is  why  discourse  assumes  a  critical  role  in  the  process  of  policy  formulation, 

broadening  the  primary  vision  of  a  limited  number  of policy actors regarding the development of 

the  Arctic  and  incorporating  it  into the goal-setting framework for all stakeholders. In light of the 

ongoing  or  impending  population  decline  in  the  Arctic  regions,  there  is  a  risk  of  misplaced 

priorities: a simplistic approach to ‘development’ based solely on extensive federal assistance in the 

form  of  financial  benefits  and  urban  environment  comfortisation  may  lead  to  severe  long-term 

consequences. 

62 

 
 
Conclusion 

In  this  research,  a  qualitative  content  analysis  of  the  discourse  on  urban  shrinkage  in  multilevel 

governance in the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation has been conducted. The central theme of 

this  work  is  that  the  discourses  employed  by  policymakers  in  the  Arctic  significantly  influence 

decision-making  processes.  Policy  actors,  guided  by  their  values,  beliefs,  and  ideological 

perspectives,  which  often  entail  a  limited  vision  of  reality,  create  problems  and  propose  policy 

responses that ultimately shape urban governance. Studying discourse is crucial for comprehending 

how policies work: who are the key policymakers shaping the discourse, what issues they prioritise, 

and  how  they  formulate  solutions.  Moreover,  the  discourse  reveals  the  power  dynamics  among 

actors, with the most influential gaining greater visibility and influence.  

The  research  was  conducted  on  the  Russian  Arctic  instance,  which  is  a  significantly 

urbanised territory of Russia. It faces the challenge of long-term urban depopulation, accompanied 

by a range of related issues. Statistical data reveal that the population within the current boundaries 

of  the  Arctic  has  decreased  by  over  a  third,  dropping  from  3.78  million  to  2.41  million  people. 

Moreover, the rate of population decline remains on the rise. In light of these trends, the question of 

developing Arctic regions and cities under depopulation becomes crucial. The case of the Arctic is 

particularly  intriguing  due  to  the  abundance  of  policymakers  who  contribute  to  discussions  on 

urban development. 

The theoretical framework of the research is underpinned by the policy studies branch and is 

based  on  Lasswell’s  cyclical  model  of  the  policymaking  process,  developed  in  the  1950s,  and 

subsequently  refined  by  other  scholars,  such as Jann & Wegrich (2017). Specifically, the focus of 

the  research  is  on  the  second  stage  of  the  policymaking  process  —  policy  formulation,  which 

involves exploring policy alternatives, identifying problems and solutions, and elucidating how the 

selected  solutions  will  address  the  problem  at  hand.  The  policy  formulation  process  is  further 

explored  through  the  Policy  Design  Theory,  as  presented  by  Linder  &  Peters  (1987),  which 

emphasises  policy  design  as  a  crucial  determinant  of  a  policy’s  success  and  effectiveness. 

Additionally, the work acknowledges the contributions of social constructionism scholars who have 

explored  the  discursive  approach  to  policymaking,  including  Ball  (1993,  2015),  Fischer  (2003), 

Yanow (1995, 2007), and Bacchi (1999, 2000, 2009). 

Scholars  exploring  urban  shrinkage  from  various  corners  of  the  globe  have  long  been 

acutely  aware  of  the  challenge  posed  by  the  inadequate  response  to  population  decline  and 

pro-growth  policies  (for  instance, Wiechmann & Pallagst, 2012). This thesis endeavours to bridge 

the existing research gap regarding policy responses to urban shrinkage, contending that the vague 

63 

 
and  contradictory  policy  formulation  to  the  Arctic’s  depopulating  regions  and  cities  impedes  the 

implementation of adaptive responses. 

This  thesis  is  based  on  an  analysis  of  news  media  publications  featuring  statements  by 

Arctic officials from 2014 to 2019 and 2020 to 2024. It delves into the key trends and conducts an 

examination  of  a  sample  comprising  106  publications,  employing  qualitative  content  analysis 

(QCA)  methodology.  The  analysis uncovers a notable increase in references to population decline 

in  the  recent  period.  Moreover,  it  highlights  the  inherent  contradictions  in  the  discourse,  where 

officials  attribute  macroeconomic  factors  as  the  root  cause  of  the  challenges  associated  with 

population decline, yet they propose more readily implementable measures in the housing sector as 

solutions. 

The  final  discourses  (themes)  of  QCA:  ‘Stop  shrinkage  via  providing  financial  benefits’, 

‘Stop  shrinkage  via  comfortisation’,  and 

‘Mitigate  urban  shrinkage  problems 

through 

compactisation’. An analysis of actor mentions reveals a significant role played by a narrow circle 

of policymakers in shaping these discourses, including federal officials and governors of the regions 

vying  for  the  status  of  flagship  Arctic  regions,  such  as  the  Murmansk  Oblast’  and  Arkhangel’sk 

Oblast’.  Concurrently  with  discourses  on  halting  shrinkage,  there  is  a  growing  discourse  on 

compactisation  championed  by  the  Komi  Republic  and  its  cities  of  Vorkuta  and  Inta.  The 

compactisation  approach  is  not  considered  as  a  replacement  for  growth  strategy,  but  rather  as an 

urgent solution to address housing sector acute challenges. 

The  research  is  underpinned  by  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  both  current  and  previous 

strategic planning documents across all territorial levels, encompassing federal, regional, and local 

jurisdictions.  A  total  of  114  documents,  including strategies for socio-economic development and 

state programs at both the federal and regional scales, were examined. The increasing frequency of 

mentions  of  terms  associated  with  population  decline  underscores  the  heightened media attention 

devoted to this issue in recent years.  

The  final  discourses  (themes):  ‘Stop  the  population  decline  at  all  costs’,  ‘Comfortisation 

turn  for  urban  growth’,  and  ‘New  jobs  as  an  intangible  remedy  against  shrinkage’.  The  analysis 

reveals that federal objectives are consistently reflected in regional and local planning, irrespective 

of the specific context in which a region or city operates. However, it is crucial to acknowledge that 

the measures proposed in regional state programs may be sensitive to the specifics of shrinkage. 

The  role  of  discourse  on  urban  shrinkage  in  the  multilevel  governance  of  the  Arctic 

therefore,  is  that  it  serves  as  a  means  of  translating  the  vision  of  key  policy  actors  —  federal 

authorities,  governors  of  Murmansk  Oblast’  and  Arkhangel’sk  Oblast’,  who  advocate  for  growth 

and  comfort  —  into  a  comprehensive  Arctic  perspective.  This  process  is  reflected  in  strategic 

64 

 
goal-setting and unifies policies across all Arctic regions, including the Komi Republic engaged in 

urban  shrinkage  practices.  This  alignment  of  efforts  underscores  the  inconsistency  of  policy 

formulation,  where  goal-setting  may  not  meet  the  expected  results.  Moreover,  it  raises  questions 

about the realisability of urban policies in the Arctic. 

65 

 
 
References 

Administration of the Apatity city (2016). Postanovleniye Administratsii goroda Apatity № 239 ot 

10  marta  2016  goda  'Ob  investitsionnoy  strategii  goroda  Apatity  s  podvedomstvennoy 

territoriyey Murmanskoy oblasti do 2020 goda' [Decree of the Administration of the Apatity 

City  No.  239  of  10  March  2016  'On  the  Investment  Strategy  of  the  Apatity  City with the 

Subordinated Territory of the Murmansk Oblast' Until 2020]; 

Administration  of 

the  Arckhangel'sk  Oblast' 

(2008).  Rasporyazheniye  administratsii 

Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  ot  16  dekabrya  2008  goda  №  278-ra/48  "O  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  do  2030  goda"  [Directive of 

the  Administration  of  the  Arckhangel'sk  Oblast'  No.  278-ra/48  of  16  December  2008 "On 

the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Arckhangel'sk Oblast'  Until 2030"]; 

Administration  of  the  Belomorskiy  Municipal  District  (2024).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii 

Belomorskogo  munitsipal’nogo  okruga  №  1015  ot  28  oktyabrya  2024  goda  'O  prognoze 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Belomorskogo  munitsipal’nogo  okruga  Respubliki 

Kareliya  na  2025  god  i  na  planovyy  period  2026  i  2027  godov'  [Decree  of  the 

Administration of the Belomorsky Municipal District No. 1015 of 28 October 2024 'On the 

Socio-Economic Development Forecast of the Belomorsky Municipal District of the Karelia 

Republic for 2025 and for the Planning Period of 2026 and 2027]; 

Administration  of 

the  Kirovsk  Municipal  District  (2024).  Postanovleniye  administratsii 

munitsipal’nogo  okruga  gorod  Kirovsk  Murmanskoy  oblasti  №  1680 ot 20 noyabrya 2024 

'Prognoz 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya 

munitsipal’nyy  okrug gorod Kirovsk s podvedomstvennoy territoriyey Murmanskoy oblasti 

na 2025 god i planovyy period 2026-2027 godov' [Decree of the Kirovsk Municipal District 

Administration  No. 1680 of 20 November 2024 'Socio-Economic Development Forecast of 

the Kirovsk Municipal District with the Subordinate Territory for 2025 and for 2026-2027]; 

Administration  of  the  Monchegorsk  Municipal  District  (2020).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii 

munitsipal’nogo okruga gorod Monchegorsk s podvedomstvennoy territoriyey № 1121 ot 10 

noyabrya  2020  goda  'O  prognoze  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo 

okruga  gorod Monchegorsk s podvedomstvennoy territoriyey Murmanskoy oblasti do 2023 

goda'  [Decree  of  the  Monchegorsk  Municipal District No. 1121 of 10 November 2020 'On 

66 

 
the Socio-Economic Development Forecast of the  Monchegorsk Municipal District with the 

Subordinate Territory of the Murmansk Oblast' Until 2023]; 

Administration  of  the  Monchegorsk  Municipal  District  (2023).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii 

munitsipal’nogo okruga gorod Monchegorsk s podvedomstvennoy territoriyey Murmanskoy 

oblasti  №  2083  ot  10.11.2023 

'O  prognoze  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

munitsipal’nogo okruga gorod Monchegorsk s podvedomstvennoy territoriyey Murmanskoy 

oblasti  do  2029  goda'  [Decree  of  the  Monchegorsk  Municipal  District  No.  2083  of  11 

October  2023  'On  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Forecast  of  the   Monchegorsk 

Municipal District with the Subordinate Territory of the Murmansk Oblast' Until 2029]; 

Administration of the Muravlenko City (2011). Postanovleniye Administratsii Goroda Muravlenko 

Yamalo-Nenetskogo avtonomnogo okruga 'Strategiya sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya 

munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  gorod  Muravlenko  na  period  do  2030  goda'  [Decree  of  the 

Administration  of  the  Muravlenko  City  of  the  Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug 'On the 

Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Muravlenko City Until 2030]; 

Administration  of 

the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2013).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii 

Nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  415-p  ot  14  noyabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Nenetskogo avtonomnogo okruga 'Obespecheniye dostupnym 

i  komfortnym  zhil’yem  i  kommunal’nymi  uslugami  grazhdan,  prozhivayushchikh  v 

Nenetskom avtonomnom okruge'" [Decree of the Administration of the Nenets Autonomous 

Okrug  No.  415-p  of  14  November  2013 "On Approval of the State Program of the Nenets 

Autonomous  Okrug  'Providing  Affordable  and  Comfortable  Housing  and  Communal 

Services to Citizens Living in the Nenets Autonomous Okrug'"]; 

Administration  of 

the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2014).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii 

Nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  223-p  ot  26  iyunya  2014  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  'Razvitiye  investitsionnoy 

deyatel’nosti,  predprinimatel’stva  i  turizma v Nenetskom avtonomnom okruge'" [Decree of 

the  Administration  of  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  No.  223-p  of  24  June  2014  "On 

Approval  of  the  State  Program  of  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  'Investment  Activity, 

Entrepreneurship and Tourism Development in the Nenets Autonomous Okrug'"]; 

Administration of the Olenegorsk City (2019). Postanovleniye Administratsii goroda Olenegorska s 

podvedomstvennoy 

territoriyey  Murmanskoy 

oblasti 

ob 

odobrenii 

prognoza 

67 

 
sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Olenegorska  na  2020  god  i  na  period  do 2024 goda 

[Decree of the Administration of the Olenegorsk City with the Subordinated Territory of the 

Murmansk  Oblasr'  'On  the  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Forecast  of the 

Olenegorsk City for 2020 and Until 2024']; 

Administration of the Olenegorsk City (2022). Postanovleniye Administratsii goroda Olenegorska s 

podvedomstvennoy 

territoriyey  Murmanskoy 

oblasti 

ob 

odobrenii 

prognoza 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Olenegorska  na  2023  god  i  na  period  do 2027 goda 

[Decree of the Administration of the Olenegorsk City with the Subordinated Territory of the 

Murmansk  Oblasr'  'On  the  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Forecast  of the 

Olenegorsk City for 2023 and Until 2027']; 

Administration  of  the  Pevek  Urban  District  (2024).  Rasporyazheniye  Administratsii  gorodskogo 

okruga Pevek № 400-ra ot 11 noyabrya 2024 goda 'O prognoze sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  gorodskogo  okruga  Pevek'  [Directive  of  the  Administration  of  the  Pevek  Urban 

District No. 400-ra of 11 November 2024 'On the Socio-Economic Development Forecast of 

the Pevek Urban district]; 

Administration  of  the  Polyarnyye  Zori  City  (2019).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii  goroda 

Polyarnyye  Zori  s  podvedomstvennoy  territoriyey  №  1288  ot  5  noyabrya  2019  goda  'O 

prognoze 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  g. 

Polyarnyye  Zori  s  podvedomstvennoy  territoriyey  na  2020  god  i  na  period  do  2024  goda' 

[Decree of the Administration of the Polyarnye Zori City with its Subordinate Territory No. 

1288 of 5 November 2019 'On the Socio-Economic Development Forecast of the Polyarnye 

Zori City with its Subordinate Territory for 2020 and Until 2024]; 

Administration  of  the  Polyarnyye  Zori  City  (2024).  Postanovleniye  Administratsii  goroda 

Polyarnyye Zori s podvedomstvennoy territoriyey № 1117 ot 6 noyabrya 2024 'O prognoze 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  g.  Polyarnyye  Zori  s 

podvedomstvennoy  territoriyey'  [Decree  of  the  Administration  of  the  Polyarnye  Zori  City 

with  its  Subordinate  Territory  No.  1117   6  November   2024  'On  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Forecast of the Polyarnye Zori City with its Subordinate Territory]; 

Alcantara,  C.,  Broschek,  J., & Nelles, J. (2016). Rethinking Multilevel Governance as an Instance 

of Multilevel Politics: A Conceptual Strategy. Territory, Politics, Governance, 4(1), 33-51; 

68 

 
Alejandro,  A.,  &  Zhao,  L.  (2024).  Multi-method  Qualitative  Text  and  Discourse  analysis:  A 

Methodological framework. Qualitative inquiry, 30(6), 461-473; 

Arkhangel'sk  City  Duma  (2022).  Resheniye  Arkhangel’skoy  gorodskoy  Dumy  №  598  ot  30 

noyabrya 2022 'Ob uvterzhdenii Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya gorodskogo 

okruga "Gorod Arkhangel’sk" na period do 2035 goda' [Arkhangelsk City Duma Municipal 

By-Law No. 598 of 30 November 2022 'On Approval of  the Socio-Economic Development 

Strategy of the Arkhangelsk City District Until 2035']; 

Arkhangel'sk  City Mayor (2008). Postavnovleniye mera goroda Arkhangel’ska   №120 ot 20 marta 

2008 goda 'O strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya munitsipal’nogo obrazovaniya 

"Gorod Arkhangel’sk" na period do 2020 goda' [Decree of the Arkhangel'sk City Mayor No. 

120  of  20  March  2008 

'On 

the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of 

the 

ArkhangelskCity Until 2020]; 

Assembly  of  the  Deputies  of  the  Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2019).  Postanovleniye  Sobraniya 

deputatov  Nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  256-sd  ot  7  noyabrya  2019  goda  "Ob 

utverzhdenii  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Nenetskogo  avtonomnogo 

okruga do 2030 goda" [Decree of the Assembly of the Deputies of the Nenets Autonomous 

Okrug No. 256-sd of 7 November 2019 "On Approval of the Socio-Economic Development 

Strategy of the Nenets Autonomous Okrug Until 2030"]; 

Bacchi,  C.  (2000).  Policy  as  Discourse:  What  Does  It Mean? Where Does It Get Us?. Discourse: 

Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 21(1), 45-57; 

Bacchi,  C.  (2009).  Analysing  Policy:  What’s  the  Problem  Represented  to  Be.  Pearson  Higher 

Education; 

Bacchi,  C.  L.  (1999).  Women,  Policy  and  Politics:  The  Construction  of  Policy  Problems.  SAGE 

Publications; 

Bacchi, C., & Goodwin, S. (2016). Poststructural Policy Analysis: A Guide to Practice. Springer; 

Ball,  S.  J.  (1993).  What  Is  Policy?  Texts,  Trajectories  and  Toolboxes.  The  Australian  Journal  of 

Education Studies, 13(2), 10-17; 

69 

 
Ball,  S.  J.  (2015).  What  Is  Policy?  21  Years  Later:  Reflections  on  the  Possibilities  of  Policy 

Research. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 36(3), 306-313; 

Batunova E. & Gunko M. (2018). Urban Shrinkage: An Unspoken Challenge of Spatial Planning in 

Russian Small and Medium-Sized Cities. European Planning Studies. 26(8), 1580–1597; 

Beloyarskiy Municipal District Duma (2014). Resheniye Dumy Beloyarskogo rayona № 484 ot 29 

oktyabrya  2014  goda  'Ob  strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Beloyarskogo 

rayona do 2020 goda i na period do 2030 goda' [Beloyarskiy Municipal By-Law No. 484 of 

29  October  2014  'On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the 

Beloyarskiy Municipal District Until 2020 and for 2036']; 

Beloyarskiy  Municipal  District  Duma  (2023).  Resheniye  Dumy  Beloyarskogo rayona № 76 ot 21 

dekabrya  2023  goda 

'Ob  utverzhdenii  strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

Beloyarskogo  rayona  do  2036  goda'  [Beloyarskiy  Municipal  By-Law  No.  76  of  21 

December  2023  'On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the 

Beloyarskiy Municipal District Until 2036']; 

Bernt, M. (2019). The Emergence of “Stadtumbau Ost”. Urban Geography, 40(2), 174-191; 

Bernt, M., Haase, A., Großmann, K., Cocks, M., Couch, C., Cortese, C., & Krzysztofik, R. (2014). 

How does(n’t) Urban Shrinkage get onto the Agenda? Experiences from Leipzig, Liverpool, 

Genoa  and  Bytom.  International  Journal  of  Urban  and  Regional  Research,  38(5), 

1749–1766; 

Bilibino  Municipal  District  (2025).  Proyekt  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

Bilibinskogo  munitsipal’nogo  rayona  na  2025-  2029  gody  [Socio-Economic  Development 

Strategy Draft of the Bilibinskiy Municipal District for 2025-2029]; 

Birkland,  T.  A.  (2017).  Agenda  Setting  in  Public  Policy.  Handbook  of  Public  Policy  Analysis, 

89-104. Routledge; 

Birkland,  T.  A.  (2019).  An  Introduction to the Policy Process: Theories, Concepts, and Models of 

Public Policy Making. Routledge; 

Bontje,  M.  (2024).  Multiscalar  Governance  of  Shrinkage  in  the  Netherlands:  Past,  Present… 

Future?. Urban Planning, 9(2), 1-18; 

70 

 
Brenner, N. (2004). New State Spaces: Urban Governance and the Rescaling of Statehood. Oxford 

University Press; 

Bulunskiy  Municipal 

District 

Program 

Project 

(2010). 

Proyekt 

programmy 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya 

'Bulunskiy  ulus 

(rayon)'  Respubliki  Sakha  (Yakutiya)  na  2010-2012  gody  [Socio-Economic  Development 

Program Draft of of the Bulunskiy Municipal District of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) for 

2010-2012]; 

Bulunskiy Municipal District Council of Deputies (2018). Resheniye Bulunskogo rayonnogo soveta 

deputatov  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  'Bulunskiy  ulus  (rayon)'  №  09/07 ot 18 dekabrya 

2018 goda 'Ob utverzhdenii Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya muntsiipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya  "Bulunskiy  ulus  (rayon)  na  2018-2020  gody  i  na  period  do  2030  goda" 

[Bulunskiy  Municipal  By-Law  No.  09/07  of  18  December  2018  'On  Approval  of  the 

Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Bulunsky  Ulus  (Municipal  District)  for 

2018-2020 and Until 2030]; 

Burr, V. (2015). Social Constructionism. Routledge; 

Cobb,  R.  W.,  &  Ross,  M.  H.  (1997).  Agenda  Setting  and  the  Denial  of  Agenda  Access:  Key 

concepts. Cultural strategies of agenda denial, 3-24; 

Chigareva,  D.  (2022).  Review  of  Spatial  Planning  Instruments  in  a  Russian  Shrinking  City:  The 

Case  of  Kirovsk  in  the  Murmansk  Region.  Postsocialist  Shrinking  Cities,  213-226. 

Routledge; 

Chirikova, A. & Ledyaev, V. (2017). Vlast’ v malom rossiyskom gorode [Power in a small Russian 

city]. M.: Natsional’nyy issledovatel’skiy universitet Vysshaya shkola ekonomiki [Moscow: 

National Research University of Higher School of Economics]; 

Coleman, D., & Rowthorn, R. (2011). Who’s Afraid of Population Decline? A Critical Examination 

of Its Consequences. Population and Development Review, 37, 217-248; 

Council of Deputies of the Apatity (2020). Resheniye Soveta deputatov goroda Apatity № 216 ot 30 

noyabrya  2020  goda  'O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  goroda  Apatity  na 

2021-2025  gody'  [Apatity  Municipal  By-law  No.  216  of  30  November  2020  'On  On 

71 

 
Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  city  of  Apatity  for 

2021-2025']; 

Demoscope  Weekly.  (n.a.)  Vsesoyuznaya  perepis'  naseleniya  1989  g.  [Soviet  Union  Population 

Census  of  1989].  Available  at:  http://www.demoscope.ru/weekly/ssp/rus89_reg1.php 

(accessed 20 October 2024). (in Russian); 

Döringer,  S.,  Uchiyama,  Y.,  Penker,  M.,  &  Kohsaka,  R.  (2020).  A  Meta-Analysis  of  Shrinking 

Cities  in  Europe  and  Japan.  Towards  an  Integrative  Research  Agenda.  European  Planning 

Studies, 28(9), 1693-1712; 

Elo,  S.,  &  Kyngäs,  H.  (2008).  The  Qualitative  Content  Analysis  Process.  Journal  of  Advanced 

Nursing, 62(1), 107-115; 

Eraydin,  A.  &  Özatağan, G. (2021). Pathways to a Resilient Future: A Review of Policy Agendas 

and Governance Practices in Shrinking Cities. Cities, 115, 1-9; 

ERDC  (2024).  Podpisan  zakon o rasshirenii prefrezhima AZRF na dva rajona Hanty-Mansijskogo 

avtonomnogo  okruga  [A  Law  has  been  Signed  on  Extending  the  Preferential Mode of the 

Arctic  Zone  of  Russian  Federation  to  two  Districts  of  the  Khanty-Mansiysk  Autonomous 

Okrug]. Available at:  

https://erdc.ru/news/podpisan-zakon-o-rasshirenii-prefrezhima-azrf-na-dva-rayona-khanty-m

ansiyskogo-avtonomnogo-okruga/  (accessed 19 October 2024). (in Russian); 

Eva,  M.,  Cehan,  A.,  &  Lazăr,  A.  (2021).  Patterns  of  Urban  Shrinkage:  A Systematic Analysis of 

Romanian Cities (1992–2020). Sustainability, 13(13), 7514; 

Fischer, F. (2003). Reframing Public Policy: Discursive Politics and Deliberative Practices. Oxford 

University Press; 

Goodwin, S. (2011). Analysing Policy as Discourse: Methodological Advances in Policy Analysis. 

Methodological  Choice  and  Design:  Scholarship,  Policy  and  Practice  in  Social  and 

Educational Research, 167-180; 

Government  of  the  Arckhangel'sk  Oblast'  (2013a).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Arkhangel’skoy 

oblasti  №  475-pp  ot  11  dekabrya  2013  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme 

Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  'Obespecheniye  kachestvennym,  dostupnym  zhil’yem  i  ob'yektami 

inzhenernoy  infrastruktury  naseleniya  Arkhangel’skoy oblasti'" [Decree of the Government 

72 

 
of the Arckhangel'sk Oblast' No. № 475-pp of 11 December 2013 "On the State Program of 

the Arckhangel'sk Oblast' 'High-quality, Affordable Housing and Engineering Infrastructure 

Facilities Provision for the Population of the Arkhangelsk Oblast''"]; 

Government  of  the  Arckhangel'sk  Oblast'  (2013b).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Arkhangel’skoy 

oblasti № 462-pp ot 8 oktyabrya 2013 goda "Ob utverzhdenii gosudarstvennoy programmy 

Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  'Ekonomicheskoye  razvitiye  i  investitsionnaya  deyatel’nost’  v 

Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  na  2014-2024  gody'"  [Decree  of 

the  Government  of  the 

Arckhangel'sk  Oblast'  No.  №  462-pp  of  8  October  2013  "On  the  State  Program  of  the 

Arkhangel'sk Oblast' 'Economic Development and Investment Activities in the Arkhangel'sk 

Oblast' for 2014-2024'"]; 

Government  of  the  Arckhangel'sk  Oblast'  (2019).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Arkhangel’skoy 

oblasti  №  547-pp  ot  10  oktyabrya  2019  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme 

Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  'Ekonomicheskoye  razvitiye  i  investitsionnaya  deyatel’nost’  v 

Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the  Arckhangel'sk  Oblast'  No.  № 

547-pp  of  10  October  2019  "On  the  State  Program  of the Arkhangel'sk Oblast' 'Economic 

Development and Investment Activities in the Arkhangel'sk Oblast''"]; 

Government  of 

the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug 

(2013).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva 

Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  410  ot  21  oktyabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga 

'Stimulirovaniye 

ekonomicheskoy  aktivnosti  naseleniya  Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga'" [Decree of the 

Government  of  the  the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug   No.  410  of  21  October  2013  "On 

Approval  of  the  State  Program  of  the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug  'Stimulating  the 

Economic Activity of the Population of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug'"]; 

Government  of 

the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug  (2014).  Rasporyazheniye  Pravitel’stva 

Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  290-rp  ot  16  iyulya  2014  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya Chukotskogo avtonomnogo okruga do 2030 

goda" [Directive of the Government of the the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug  No. 290-rp of 

16 July 2014 "On Approval of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Chukotka 

Autonomous Okrug Until 2030"]; 

Government  of 

the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug 

(2017).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva 

Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  316  ot  16  avgusta  2017  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

73 

 
gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  'Razvitiye  zhilishchnogo 

stroitel’stva  v  Chukotskom  avtonomnom  okruge'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the  the 

Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug   No.  316  of  16  August  2017  "On  Approval  of  the  State 

Program of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug 'Development of Housing Construction in the 

Chukotka Autonomous Okrug'"]; 

Government  of 

the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug  (2023a).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva 

Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  540  ot  29  dekabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  'Razvitiye  zhilishchnogo 

stroitel’stva  v  Chukotskom  avtonomnom  okruge'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the  the 

Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug   No.  540  of  19  December  2013  "On  Approval  of  the State 

Program of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug 'Development of Housing Construction in the 

Chukotka Autonomous Okrug'"]; 

Government  of 

the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug  (2023b).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva 

Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  538  ot  29  dekabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii 

gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga 

'Stimulirovaniye 

ekonomicheskoy  aktivnosti  naseleniya  Chukotskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga'" [Decree of the 

Government  of  the  the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug   No. 538 of 29 December 2013 "On 

Approval  of  the  State  Program  of  the  Chukotka  Autonomous  Okrug  'Stimulating  the 

Economic Activity of the Population of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug'"]; 

Government of the Karelia Republic (2007). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Karelii ot 10 

aprelya 2007 goda № 129r-P "O Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya Respubliki 

Kareliya do 2020 goda" [Directive of the Government of the Karelia Republic No. 129r-P of 

10 April 2007 "On the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Karelia Republic Until 

2020"]; 

Government  of  the  Karelia  Republic  (2014a).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Respubliki  Karelii  № 

351-P  ot  26  noyabrya  2014  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Respubliki  Karelii 

'Obespecheniye  dostupnym 

i  komfortnym  zhil’yem 

i  zhilishchno-kommunal’nymi 

uslugami'"  [Decree  of the Government of the Karelia Republic No. 351-P of 26 November 

2014  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Karelia  Republic  'Provision  of  Affordable  and 

Comfortable Housing and Utilities']; 

74 

 
Government  of  the  Karelia  Republic  (2014b).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Respubliki  Karelii  № 

49-P  ot  3  marta  2014  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Respubliki 

Karelii 

'Ekonomicheskoye  razvitiye 

i 

innovatsionnaya  ekonomika'"  [Decree  of  the 

Government  of  the Karelia Republic No. 49-P of 3 March 2014 "On Approval of the State 

Program of the Karelia Republic 'Economic Development and Innovative Economy"']; 

Government of the Karelia Republic (2018). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Karelii ot 29 

dekabrya  2018  goda  №  899r-P  "Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya Respubliki Kareliya na period do 2030 goda" [Directive of the Government of the 

Karelia  Republic  No.  899r-P  of  29  December  2018  "On  Approval  of the Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Karelia Republic Until 2030"]; 

Government  of 

the  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  (2013).  Rasporyazheniye 

Pravitel’stva  Khanty-Mansiyskogo avtonomnogo okruga - Yugry ot 22 marta 2013 goda № 

101-rp 

"O  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  Khanty-Mansiyskogo 

avtonomnogo  okruga  -  Yugry  do  2030  goda"  [Directive  of  the  Government  of  the 

Khanty-Mansiysk  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  No.  101-rp  of  22  March  2013  "On  the 

Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra 

Until 2030"]; 

Government of the Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug - Yugra (2018). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva 

Khanty-Mansiyskogo  avtonomnogo okruga - Yugry № 336-p ot 5 oktyabrya 2018 goda "O 

gosudarstvennoy programme Khanty-Mansiyskogo avtonomnogo okruga - Yugry 'Razvitiye 

ekonomicheskogo  potentsiala'"  [Decree  of 

the  Government  of 

the  Khanty-Mansi 

Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  No.  336-p  of  5  October  2018  "On  the  State  Program  of  the 

Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug - Yugra 'Economic Potential Development'"]; 

Government of the Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug - Yugra (2021). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva 

Khanty-Mansiyskogo avtonomnogo okruga - Yugry № 476-p ot 31 oktyabrya 2021 goda "O 

gosudarstvennoy programme Khanty-Mansiyskogo avtonomnogo okruga - Yugry 'Razvitiye 

zhilishchnoy sfery'" [Decree of the Government of the Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug - 

Yugra  No.  476-p  of  31  October  2021  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Khanty-Mansi 

Autonomous Okrug - Yugra 'Housing Sector Development'"]; 

Government  of  the  Khanty-Mansiysk  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  (2022).  Rasporyazheniye 

Pravitel’stva  Khanty-Mansiyskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  -  Yugry  №  679-rp  ot  3  noyabrya 

75 

 
2022  goda  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Khanty-Mansiyskogo 

avtonomnogo  okruga  -  Yugry  do  2036  goda  s  tselevymi  oriyentirami  do  2050  goda" 

[Directive  of  the  Government  of  the  Khanty-Mansiysk  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  No. 

679-rp  of  3  November  2022  "On  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the 

Khanty-Mansiysk Autonomous Okrug - Yugra Until 2036 with targets Until 2050"]; 

Government  of 

the  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  (2023a).  Postanovleniye 

Pravitel’stva  Khanty-Mansiyskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  -  Yugry  №  561-p  ot  10 noyabrya 

2023  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Khanty-Mansiyskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  - 

Yugry 'Construction'" [Decree of the Government of the Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug 

-  Yugra  No.  561-p  of  10  November  2023  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Khanty-Mansi 

Autonomous Okrug - Yugra 'Construction'"]; 

Government  of 

the  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra  (2023b).  Postanovleniye 

Pravitel’stva  Khanty-Mansiyskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  -  Yugry  №  557-p  ot  10 noyabrya 

2023  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Khanty-Mansiyskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  - 

Yugry 

'Razvitiye  ekonomicheskogo  potentsiala'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the 

Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug  - Yugra No. 557-p of 10 November 2023 "On the State 

Program  of 

the  Khanty-Mansi  Autonomous  Okrug  -  Yugra 

'Economic  Potential 

Development'"]; 

Government  of the Komi Republic (2006). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Komi № 45 ot 

27  marta  2006  g.  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Respubliki  Komi  na 

period do 2020 goda" [Decree of the Government of the Komi Republic No. 45 of 27 March 

2006 "On the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Komi Republic Until 2020"]; 

Government  of  the  Komi  Republic (2012a). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Komi № 413 

ot  28  sentyabrya  2012  goda  "O  Gosudarstvennoy  programme  Respubliki  Komi  'Razvitiye 

stroitel’stva  i  zhilishchno-kommunal’nogo  kompleksa,  energosberezheniye  i  povysheniye 

energoeffektivnosti'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the  Komi  Republic  No.  413  of  28 

September  2012  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Komi Republic "Construction and Housing 

Complex Development, Energy Saving and Energy Efficiency Improvement"]; 

Government  of  the  Komi Republic (2012b). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Komi № 418 

ot  28  sentyabrya  2012  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Respubliki 

Komi 'Razvitiye ekonomiki'" [Decree of the Government of the Komi Republic No. 418 of 

76 

 
28 September 2012 "On Approval of the the State Program of the Komi Republic 'Economic 

Development'"]; 

Government  of  the  Komi  Republic (2019a). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Komi № 185 

ot  11  aprelya  2019  g.  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya Respubliki Komi 

na  period  do  2035  goda"  [Decree  of  the Government of the Komi Republic No. 185 of 11 

April  2019  "On  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Komi  Republic  Until 

2035"]; 

Government  of  the  Komi Republic (2019b). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Komi № 520 

ot  31  oktyabrya  2019  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Respubliki  Komi  'Razvitiye 

stroitel’stva, obespecheniye dostupnym i komfortnym zhil’yom i kommunal’nymi uslugami 

grazhdan'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the Komi Republic No. 520 of 31 October 2019 

"On  the  State  Program  of  the  Komi  Republic “Construction Development, Affordable and 

Comfortable Housing and Public Utilities provision for citizens"]; 

Government  of  the  Komi  Republic (2019c). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Respubliki Komi № 521 

ot  31  oktyabrya  2019  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Respubliki  Komi  'Razvitiye 

ekonomiki i promyshlennosti'" [Decree of the Government of the Komi Republic No. 521 of 

31  October  2019  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Komi  Republic  'Economic  and  Industrial 

Development'"]; 

Government  of  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray  (2013a).  Proyekt  strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  Krasnoyarskogo  kraya  na  period  do  2020  goda  [Draft  of  the  Socio-economic 

Development Strategy of the Krasnoyarsk Kray Until 2020]; 

Government of the Krasnoyarsk Kray (2013b). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Krasnoyarskogo kraya 

№  514-p  ot  30  sentyabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy 

Krasnoyarskogo  kraya  do  2030  goda  'Sozdaniye  usloviy  dlya  obespecheniya  zhil’yem 

grazhdan  i  formirovaniye komfortnoy gorodskoy sredy'" [Decree of the Government of the 

Krasnoyarsk  Kray  No. 514-p of 30 September 2013 "On Approval of the State Program of 

the  Krasnoyarsk Kray 'Making conditions for Providing Citizens with Housing and Creating 

a Comfortable Urban Environment'"]; 

Government of the Krasnoyarsk Kray (2013c). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Krasnoyarskogo kraya 

№  505-p  ot  30  sentyabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy 

77 

 
Krasnoyarskogo  kraya  do  2030  goda  'Razvitiye  promyshlennosti,  energetiki,  malogo  i 

srednego predprinimatel’stva i innovatsionnoy deyatel’nosti'" [Decree of the Government of 

the Krasnoyarsk Kray No. 505-p of 30 September 2013 "On Approval of the State Program 

of  the   Krasnoyarsk  Kray  'Development  of  Industry,  Energy,  Small  and  Medium-Sized 

Enterprises and Innovation Activities'"]; 

Government  of  the  Krasnoyarsk  Kray  (2018).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva Krasnoyarskogo kraya 

№  647-p  ot  30  oktyabrya  2018  "Ob  utverzhdenii  strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  Krasnoyarskogo  kraya  do  2030  goda"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the 

Krasnoyarsk  Kray  No.  647-p  of  30  October  2018  "On   Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Krasnoyarsk Kray Until 2030"]; 

Government  of the Murmansk Oblast' (2010). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Murmanskoy oblasti ot 

26  avgusta  2010  goda  №  383-PP  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

Murmanskoy oblasti do 2020 goda i na period do 2025 goda" [Decree of the Government of 

the  Murmansk  Oblast'  No.  383-PP  of  26  August  2010  "On  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Murmansk Oblast' to 2020 and Until 2025"]; 

Government of the Murmansk Oblast' (2013a). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Murmanskoy oblasti ot 

25  dekabrya  2013  goda  N  768-PP/20  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

Murmanskoy oblasti do 2020 goda i na period do 2025 goda" [Decree of the Government of 

the  Murmansk  Oblast'  No.  768-PP/20  of  25  December  2013  "On  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Murmansk Oblast' to 2020 and Until 2025"]; 

Government of the Murmansk Oblast' (2013b). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Murmanskoy oblasti № 

571-PP  ot  30  sentyabrya  2013  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Murmanskoy oblasti 

'Obespecheniye  komfortnoy  sredy  prozhivaniya  naseleniya  regiona'"  [Decree  of  the 

Government  of  the  Murmansk  Oblast'  No.  571-PP  of  30  September  2013  "On  the  State 

Program  of  the  Murmansk  Oblast'  'Ensuring  a  Comfortable  Living  Environment  for  the 

region's population']; 

Government of the Murmansk Oblast' (2013c). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Murmanskoy oblasti № 

557-PP  ot  30  sentyabrya  2013  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy 

Murmanskoy 

oblasti 

'Razvitiye 

ekonomicheskogo 

potentsiala 

i 

formirovaniye 

blagopriyatnogo  predprinimatel’skogo  klimata'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the 

Murmansk Oblast' No. 557-PP of 30 September 2013 "On Approval of the State Program of 

78 

 
the  Murmansk  Oblast'  'Developing  Economic  Potential  and Creating a Favorable Business 

Climate'"]; 

Government of the Murmansk Oblast' (2020a). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Murmanskoy oblasti № 

795-PP  ot  13  noyabrya  2020  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Murmanskoy  oblasti 

'Komfortnoye  zhil’ye  i  gorodskaya  sreda'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the  Murmansk 

Oblast'  No. 795-PP of 13 November 2020 "On the State Program of the Murmansk Oblast' 

'Comfortable Housing and Urban Environment']; 

Government of the Murmansk Oblast' (2020b). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Murmanskoy oblasti № 

780-PP  ot  11  noyabrya  2020  goda  "Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy 

Murmanskoy  oblasti  'Ekonomicheskiy  Potentsial'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the 

Murmansk  Oblast'  No.  780-PP  of  11  November  2020  "On  the  State  Program  of  the 

Murmansk Oblast' 'Economic potential'"]; 

Government of the Russian Federation (2009). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii 

№ 2094-р ot 28 dekabrya 2009 goda 'Ob utverzhdenii Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya Dal’nego Vostoka i Baykal’skogo regiona na period do 2025 goda [Directive of the 

Government of the Russian Federation No. 2094-р of 28 December 2009 ‘On the Approval 

of  the  Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Far East and the Baykal Region Until 

2025]; 

Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2011a).  Rasporyazheniye  Pravitel’stva  Rossiyskoy 

Federatsii  №  2074-р  ot  18  noyabrya  2011  goda 

'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya Severo-Zapadnogo federal’nogo okruga na period do 

2020  goda  [Directive  of  the  Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  No.  2074-р  of  18 

November  2011  ‘On  the  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the 

North-Western Federal District Until 2020]; 

Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2011b).  Rasporyazheniye  Pravitel’stva  Rossiyskoy 

Federatsii  №  1757-р  ot  6  oktyabrya  2011  goda 

'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Ural’skogo  federal’nogo  okruga  na  period  do  2020 

goda [Directive of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 1757-р of 6 October 2011 

‘On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Ural  Federal  District 

Until 2020]; 

79 

 
Government  of Russian Federation (2014a). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii № 

316  ot  15  aprelya  2014  goda  ‘Ob  utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Rossiyskoy 

Federatsii  “Ekonomicheskoye  razvitiye  i  innovatsionnaya  ekonomika”’  [Decree  of  the 

Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  No.  316  of  15  April  2014  ‘On  Approval  of  the 

Russian  Federation  state  programme  of  "Economic  development  and 

innovative 

economy"’]; 

Government of Russian Federation (2014b). Postanovleniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii № 

366  ot  21  aprelya  2014 

‘Gosudarstvennaya  programma  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii 

Sotsian’no-ekonomicheskoe razvitie Arkticheskoy zony Rossiyskoy Federatsii na period do 

2020  goda’  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  Russian  Federation  No.  366  of  21  April  2014 

‘Russian Federation state programme of Socio-economic development of the Arctic zone for 

2020’]; 

Government  of  Russian  Federation  (2017).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii № 

1710  ot 30 dekabrya 2017 goda ‘Ob utverzhdenii gosudarstvennoy programmy Rossiyskoy 

Federatsii  “Obespecheniye  dostupnym  i  komfortnym  zhil’yem  i  kommnal’nymi  uslugami 

grazhdan Rossiyskoy Federatsii”’ [Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 

1710  of  30  December  2017  ‘On  Approval  of  the  Russian  Federation  state  programme  of 

"Provision  of affordable and comfortable housing and communal services to citizens of the 

Russian Federation"’]; 

Government of the Russian Federation (2019). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii 

№  207-p  ot  13  fevralya  2019  goda  ‘Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii  prostranstvennogo razvitiya 

Rossiyskoy Federatsii na period do 2025 goda’ [Directive of the Government of the Russian 

Federation  No.  207-p  of  13  February  2019  ‘On  the  Approval  of  the  Spatial  Development 

Strategy of the Russian Federation Until 2025’]; 

Government  of  Russian  Federation  (2021).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii № 

484 ot 30 marta 2021 ‘Ob utverzhdenii gosudarstvennoy programmy Rossiyskoy Federatsii 

“Sotsial’no-ekonomicheskoye razvitiye Arkticheskoy zony Rossiyskoy Federatsii”’ [Decree 

of  the  Government  of  Russian  Federation  No. 484 of 30 March 2021 ‘On Approval of the 

Russian  Federation  state programme of Socio-economic development of the Arctic zone of 

the Russian Federation’]; 

80 

 
Government of the Russian Federation (2022). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii 

№  3268-р  ot  31  oktyabrya  2022  goda  ‘Strategiya  razvitiya  stroitel’noy  otrasli  i 

zhilishchno-kommunal’nogo  khozyaystva  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  na  period  do  2030 goda s 

prognozom  do  2035  goda’  [Directive  of  the  Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  No. 

3268-р  of  31  October  2022  ‘Construction  Industry  and  Housing  and  Communal  services 

Development Strategy of the Russian Federation Until 2030 with a Forecast to 2035]; 

Government of the Russian Federation (2023). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii 

№  129-р  ot 26 yanvarya 2023 goda 'Ob utverzhdenii Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya Sibirskogo federal’nogo okruga do 2035 goda [Directive of the Government of the 

Russian  Federation  No.  129-р  of  26  January  2023  ‘On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Siberian Federal District until 2035]; 

Government of the Russian Federation (2024). Rasporyazheniye Pravitel’stva Rossiyskoy Federatsii 

№ 4146-р ot 28 dekabrya 2024 goda ‘Ob utverzhdenii Strategii prostranstvennogo razvitiya 

Rossiyskoy Federatsii na period do 2030 goda s prognozom do 2036 goda’ [Directive of the 

Government of the Russian Federation No. 4146-р of 28 December 2024 ‘On the Approval 

of the Spatial Development Strategy of the Russian Federation Until 2030 and with Forecast 

to 2036 goda’]; 

Government  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  (2022a).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Respubliki 

Sakha (Yakutia) № 428 ot 18 iyulya 2022 goda "O gosudarstvennoy programme Respubliki 

Sakha (Yakutiya) "Obespecheniye kachestvennym zhil’yem" [Decree of the Government of 

the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) No. 428 of 18 July 2022 "On the State Program of the Sakha 

Republic (Yakutia) "'Providing High-Quality Housing'"]; 

Government  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  (2022b).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva  Respubliki 

Sakha (Yakutia) № 437 ot 18 iyulya 2022 goda "O gosudarstvennoy programme Respubliki 

Sakha (Yakutiya) 'Ekonomicheskoye razvitiye Respubliki Sakha (Yakutiya)'" [Decree of the 

Government  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  No.  437  of  18  July  2022  "On  the  State 

Program  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia) "'Economic Development of the Sakha Republic 

(Yakutia)'"]; 

Government  of  the  Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2013a).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva 

Yamalo-nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  1099-P  ot  25  dekabrya  2013  goda  "O 

gosudarstvennoy  programme  Yamalo-nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga 

'Razvitiye 

81 

 
stroitel’nogo  kompleksa  i  zhilishchnoy  sfery'"  [Decree  of  the  Government  of  the 

Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  No.  1099-P  of  25  December  2013  "On  the  State 

Program  of  the  Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  'Development  of  the  Construction 

Complex and Housing Sector'"]; 

Government  of  the  Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2013b).  Postanovleniye  Pravitel’stva 

Yamalo-nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  1111-P  ot  25  dekabrya  2013  goda  "Ob 

utverzhdenii  gosudarstvennoy  programmy  Yamalo-nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga 

'Ekonomicheskoye  razvitiye  i  innovatsionnaya  ekonomika'"  [Decree  of  the Government of 

the  Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  No.  1111-P  of  25  December  2013  "On  the  State 

Program of the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug 'Economic Development and Innovative 

Economy'"]; 

Governor  of  the  Archangel'sk  Oblast'  (2019).  Oblastnoy  Zakon  Arkhangel’skoy  oblasti  ot  18 

fevralya 2019 № 57-5-OZ "Ob utverzhdenii Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya 

Arkhangel’skoy oblasti do 2035 goda" [The Oblast' Law No. 57-5-OZ of 18 February 2019 

"On the Socio-economic Development Strategy of the Arkhangel'sk Oblast' Until 2035"]; 

Gunko,  M.,  Batunova,  E.,  &  Medvedev,  A. (2021). Rethinking Urban Form in a Shrinking Arctic 

City. Space Populations Societies, (2020/3-2021/1); 

Gunko  M.,  Eremenko  Y.,  Batunova  E.  (2020).  Strategii  planirovaniya  v  usloviyah  gorodskogo 

szhatiya v Rossii: issledovanie malyh i srednih gorodov [Planning Strategies in the Context 

of  Urban  Shrinkage  in Russia: Evidence from Small and Medium-sized Cities]. Mir Rossii 

[Universe of Russia], 29(3), 121–141. (in Russian); 

Haase, A., Rink, D., & Grossmann, K. (2016). Shrinking Cities in Post‐Socialist Europe: What Can 

We Learn From Their Analysis for Theory Building Today?. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, 

Human Geography, 98(4), 305-319; 

Hartt, M., & Hackworth, J. (2020). Shrinking Cities, Shrinking Households, or Both?. International 

Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 44(6), 1083-1095; 

Heemsbergen,  L.  J.,  &  Lindgren,  S. (2014). The Power of Precision Air Strikes and Social Media 

Feeds  in  the  2012  Israel–Hamas  Conflict:‘Targeting  Transparency’.  Australian  Journal  of 

International Affairs, 68(5), 569-591; 

82 

 
Hill, M., & Varone, F. (2021). The Public Policy Process. Routledge; 

Hollander J.B., Pallagst K., Schwarz T., & Popper F.J. (2009). Planning Shrinking Cities. Progress 

in Planning, 72(4), 223–232; 

Hospers,  G.  J.  (2014).  Policy  Responses  to  Urban  Shrinkage:  From  Growth  Thinking  to  Civic 

Engagement. European Planning Studies, 22(7), 1507-1523; 

Howlett,  M.  (2009).  Governance  Modes,  Policy  Regimes  and  Operational  Plans:  A  Multi-Level 

Nested Model of Policy Instrument Choice and Policy Design. Policy Sciences, 42, 73-89; 

Howlett, M. (2019). Designing Public Policies: Principles and Instruments. Routledge; 

Howlett,  M.,  &  Mukherjee,  I.  (2018).  Introduction:  The  Importance  of  Policy  Design:  Effective 

Processes, Tools and Outcomes. Handbook of Policy Design, 3-19. Routledge; 

Howlett, M., Mukherjee, I., & Woo, J. J. (2015). From Tools to Toolkits in Policy Design Studies: 

The  New  Design  Orientation  Towards  Policy  Formulation  Research.  Policy  &  Politics, 

43(2), 291-311; 

Howlett,  M.,  Vince,  J.,  &  Río  González,  P.  D.  (2017).  Policy  Integration  and  Multi-Level 

Governance:  Dealing  with  the  Vertical  Dimension  of  Policy  Mix  Designs.  Politics  and 

Governance, 5(2), 69-78; 

Ingram,  H.,  Schneider,  A.  L.,  &  Deleon,  P.  (2019).  Social  Construction  and  Policy  Design.  In 

Theories of the Policy Process, Second Edition, 93-126. Routledge; 

Inta  Urban  District  Council  (2014).  Resheniye Soveta MOGO 'Inta' №II-28/3 ot 28 fevralya 2014 

goda  'O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya 

gorodskogo okruga "Inta" na period do 2020 goda' [Inta Municipal By-law No. II-28/3 of 28 

February  2014  'On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  Inta Urban 

District Until 2020']; 

Inta Urban District Council (2020). Resheniye Soveta MO GO 'Inta' № IV-4/1 ot 25 dekabrya 2020 

goda  'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya gorodskogo okruga ‘Inta’ na period do 2035 goda' [Inta Municipal By-law No. 

IV-4/1 of 25 December 2020 'On Approval of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of 

Inta Urban District Until 2035']; 

83 

 
Jann, W., & Wegrich, K. (2017). Theories of the Policy Cycle. Handbook of Public Policy Analysis, 

69-88. Routledge; 

Joo,  Y.  M.,  & Seo, B. (2018). Dual Policy to Fight Urban Shrinkage: Daegu, South Korea. Cities, 

73, 128-137; 

Kandalaksha  Municipal  District  Council  of  Deputies  (2018).  Resheniye  Soveta  deputatov 

munitsipal’nogo obrazovaniya Kandalakshskiy rayon   № 410 ot 24 dekabrya 2018 goda ' O 

Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya 

Kandalakshskiy  rayon  na  period  do  2025  goda  i  Plana  meropriyatiy  po  eye  realizatsii 

[Kandalaksha  Municipal  By-Law  No.  410  of  24  December  2018  'On  the  Socio-Economic 

Development  Strategy  of  the  Kandalaksha  Municipal  District  Until  2025  and  the  Action 

Plan for its implementation']; 

Kemskiy Municipal District Council (2016). Resheniye Soveta Kemskogo munitsipal’nogo rayona 

№  20-3/160  ot  15  sentyabrya  2016  goda  'Ob utverzhdenii Programmy ekonomicheskogo i 

sotsial’nogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  "Kemskiy  munitsipal’nyy  rayon"  na 

2017-2020  gody  [Kemsky  Municipal  By-Law  No.  20-3/160  of  15  September  2016  'On 

Approval  of  the  Program  of  Economic  and  Social Development of the Kemsky Municipal 

District for 2017-2020']; 

Kemskiy Municipal District Council (2022). Proyekt Resheniya Soveta Kemskogo munitsipal’nogo 

rayona Respubliki Kareliya [By-Law Draft of the Kemsky Municipal District Council of the 

Republic of Karelia]; 

Kingdon, J. W. (1984). Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Brown and Company; 

Kinossian,  N.  (2017).  Re-colonising  the  Arctic:  The  Preparation  of  Spatial  Planning  Policy  in 

Murmansk Oblast, Russia. Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space, 35(2), 221-238; 

Kinossian, N. (2018). Planning Strategies and Practices in Non-core Regions: A Critical Response. 

European Planning Studies, 26(2), 365-375; 

Kirovsk  Council  of  Deputies  (2011).  Resheniye  Soveta  deputatov  g.  Kirovska  №  85  ot  20 

December  2011 

'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya 

munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  gorod  Kirovsk  do  2020  goda'  [Kirovsk  Municipal  By-Law 

84 

 
No. 85 of 20 December 2011 'On Approval of Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the 

Kirovsk City Until 2020]; 

Kola Municipal District Council of Deputies (2015). Resheniye Soveta deputatov Kol’skogo rayona  

№ 53/15 ot 17 dekabrya 2015 goda 'Ob Investitsionnoy strategii Kol’skogo rayona do 2020 

goda  i  na  period  do  2025 goda' [Kola Municipal By-Law No. 53/15 of 17 December 2015 

'On the Investment Strategy of the Kola Municipal District Until 2020 and to 2025]; 

Kostomuksha  Urban  District  Council  (2008).  Resheniye  Soveta  Kostomukshskogo  gorodskogo 

okruga  №282-SO 

ot 

30 

oktyabrya 

2008 

goda 

'Strategicheskiy 

plan 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya Kostomukshi do 2020 goda' [Kostomuksha Municipal 

By-Law  No.  282-SO  of  30  October  2008  'Strategic  Plan  for  the  Socio-Economic 

Development of Kostomuksha until 2020]; 

Kostomuksha  Urban  District  Council  (2020).  Resheniye  Soveta  Kostomukshskogo  gorodskogo 

okruga  №  457-SO/III  ot  26  marta  2020  goda 

'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  "Kostomukshskiy 

gorodskoy  okrug"  do  2030  goda  [Kostomuksha  Municipal  By-Law  No.  457-SO/III  26 

March  2020 

'On  Approval  of 

the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the 

Kostomuksha City District until 2030]; 

Kremlin.ru  (2025).  Vladimir  Putin  vystupil  na  plenarnom  zasedanii  VI  Mezhdunarodnogo 

arkticheskogo  foruma  «Arktika  –  territoriya  dialoga»  [Vladimir  Putin spoke at the plenary 

session  of  the  VI  International  Arctic  Forum  «The  Arctic  –  the  territory  of  dialogue»]. 

Available  at:  http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/76554  (accessed  6  April  2025).  (in 

Russian); 

Lee,  J.  E.,  Park,  Y.,  &  Newman,  G.  D.  (2023).  Twenty  Years of Research on Shrinking Cities: A 

Focus on Keywords and Authors. Landscape Research, 48(7), 884-899; 

Legislative  Assembly  of 

the  Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2011).  Postanovleniye 

Zakonodatel’nogo  sobraniya  Yamalo-nenetskogo  avtonomnogo  okruga  №  839  ot  14 

dekabrya 2011 goda "O Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya Yamalo-Nenetskogo 

avtonomnogo  okruga  do  2020  goda"  [Decree  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  of  the 

Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug No. 839 of 14 December 2011 "On the Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug Until 2020"]; 

85 

 
Legislative  Assembly  of 

the  Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  (2021).  Postanovleniye 

Zakonodatel’nogo sobraniya Yamalo-nenetskogo avtonomnogo okruga № 478 ot 24 iyunya 

2021  goda  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  Yamalo-Nenetskogo 

avtonomnogo  okruga  do  2035  goda"  [Decree  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  of  the 

Yamalo-Nenets  Autonomous  Okrug  No.  478  of  24  June  2021"On  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug Until 2035"]; 

Leipold,  S.,  &  Winkel,  G. (2017). Discursive Agency: (Re‐)Conceptualizing Actors and Practices 

in the Analysis of Discursive Policymaking. Policy Studies Journal, 45(3), 510-534; 

Lettieva,  E.  &  Shtinov  O.  (2023).  Raznoobrazie  v  usloviyah  depopulyacii:  territorial’noe  i 

strategicheskoe planirovanie v szhimayushchihsya gorodah Respubliki Komi [Heterogeneity 

Under  Population  Loss:  Spatial  and  Strategic  Planning  in  Shrinking  Cities  in  the  Komi 

Republic].  Gorodskie  issledovaniya  i praktiki [Urban Studies & Practices], 8(2), 57-68. (in 

Russian); 

Lettieva,  E.  (2024).  Adaptatsiya  k  gorodskomu  szhatiyu  v  usloviyakh  mnogourovnevogo 

upravleniya: sluchay Inty v Respublike Komi [Multilevel Adaptation to Urban Shrinkage in 

Inta,  Komi  Republic].  Term  paper  in  the  4th year of Urban Planning educational program, 

Higher School of Economics, Moscow;  

Libman, A., & Yakovlev, A. (2021). A Centralist Approach to Regional Development: The case of 

the  Russian  Ministry  for  the  Development  of  the  Far  East.  Europe-Asia  Studies,  73(6), 

1125-1148; 

Linder,  S.  H.,  &  Peters,  B.  G.  (1984).  From  Social  Theory  to  Policy  Design.  Journal  of  Public 

Policy, 4(3), 237-259; 

Linder,  S.  H.,  &  Peters,  B.  G.  (1987).  A  Design  Perspective  on  Policy  Implementation:  The 

Fallacies of Misplaced Prescription. Review of Policy Research, 6(3), 459-475; 

Liu, R. (2022). Long-Term Development Perspectives in the Slow Crisis of Shrinkage: Strategies of 

Coping and Exiting. Land, 14, 1-30; 

Mair, P. (1997). E.E. Schattschneider's the Semisovereign People. Political Studies, 45(5), 947-954; 

86 

 
Mallach, A. (2017). What We Talk About When We Talk About Shrinking Cities: The Ambiguity of 

Discourse and Policy Response in the United States. Cities, 69, 109-115; 

Martinez‐Fernandez  C.,  Audirac  I.,  Fol  S.,  &  Cunningham‐Sabot  E.  (2012).  Shrinking  Cities: 

Urban  Challenges  of  Globalization. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 

36(2), 213–225; 

McHoul, A., & Grace, W. (2015). A Foucault Primer: Discourse, Power and the Subject. Routledge; 

Mezen'  Municipal  District  Assembly  of  Deputies  (2020).  Resheniye  Sobraniya  deputatov 

munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  'Mezenskiy munitsipal’nyy rayon' № 145 ot 18 iyunya 2020 

goda 

'O  strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Mezenskogo  munitsipal’nogo 

rayona'  [Mezensky  Municipal  By-Law  No.  145  of  18  June  2020  'On  the  Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Mezensky Municipal District]; 

Murmansk  City  District  Council  of  Deputies  (2012).  Resheniye  Soveta  deputatov  goroda 

Murmanska № 49-660 ot 30.05.2012 'O strategicheskom plane sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  goroda  Murmanska  do  2020  goda'  [Murmansk Municipal By-Law No. 49-660 of 

30 May 2012 'On the Strategic plan for the Socio-Economic Development of the Murmansk 

City Until 2020]; 

Murmansk City District Council of Deputies (2018). Proyekt Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  gorod  Murmansk  do  2025  goda  [Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy Draft of the Murmansk City Until 2025]; 

Mykhnenko, V. & Wolff, M. (2019). State Rescaling and Economic Convergence. Regional Studies, 

53(4), 462-477; 

Mykhnenko, V. (2023). Smart Shrinkage Solutions? The Future of Present-Day Urban Regeneration 

on the Inner Peripheries of Europe. Applied Geography, 157, 1-11; 

Nilsson,  B.  (2010).  Ideology,  Environment  and  Forced  Relocation:  Kiruna  Town  on  the  Move. 

European Urban and Regional Studies, 17(4), 433-442; 

Nowlin, M. C. (2011). Theories of the Policy Process: State of the Research and Emerging Trends. 

Policy Studies Journal, 39, 41-60; 

87 

 
Noyabr'sk  City  Duma  (2014).  Resheniye  Gorodskoy  Dumy  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  gorod 

Noyabr’sk  №  54-D ot 18 dekabrya 2014 'O Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya 

munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  gorod  Noyabr’sk  na  period  do  2025  goda'  [Noyabr’sk 

Municipal By-Law   No. 54-D of 18 December 2014 'On the Socio-Economic Development 

Strategy of the  Noyabrsk City Until 2025]; 

Onega  Municipal  District  Assembly  of  Deputies  (2017).  Resheniye  Sobraniya  deputatov 

Munitsipal’nogo obrazovaniya 'Onezhskiy munitsipal’nyy rayon' № 240 ot 22 fevralya 2017 

goda  'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya  "Onezhskiy  munitsipal’nyy rayon" do 2030 goda' [Onega Municipal By-Law 

No. 240 of 22 February 2017 'On Approval of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of 

the Onega Municipal District Until 2030]; 

Pallagst,  K.  (2010).  The  Planning  Research  Agenda:  Shrinking  Cities–a  Challenge  for  Planning 

Cultures. Town Planning Review, 81(5), I-VI; 

Pallagst,  K.,  Fleschurz,  R.,  &  Said,  S.  (2017).  What  Drives  Planning  in  a  Shrinking  City?  Tales 

From Two German and Two American Cases. Town Planning Review, 88(1), 15-28; 

Pechengskiy  Municipal  District  Council  of  Deputies  (2021).  Resheniye  Soveta  deputatov 

Pechengskogo  munitsipal’nogo  okruga  №132  ot  16  aprelya  2021  goda  'Ob  utverzhdenii 

programmy  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  rayzvitiya  Pechengskogo  muntsiipal’nogo  okruga 

Murmanskoy oblasti na 2021-2025 gody' [Pechenga Municipal By-Law  No. 132 of 16 April 

2021  'On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Program  of  the  Pechenga 

Municipal District of the Murmansk Oblast' for 2021-2025]; 

Peters,  B.  G.,  Capano,  G.,  Howlett,  M.,  Mukherjee,  I.,  Chou,  M.  H.,  &  Ravinet,  P.  (2018). 

Designing  for  Policy  Effectiveness:  Defining  and  Understanding  a  Concept.  Cambridge 

University Press; 

President of the Russian Federation (2008). Ukaz Presidenta Rossiyskoy Federatsii № Pr-1969 ot 18 

sentyabrya 2008 goda ‘Osnovy gosudarstvennoy politiki Rossiyskoy Federatsii v Arktike na 

period  do  2020  goda  i  dal'neyshuyu  perspektivy’  [Decree  of  the  President  of  Russian 

Federation No. Pr-1969 of 18 September 2008 ‘On the Fundamentals of the State policy of 

the Russian Federation in the Arctic for 2020 and further perspective’]; 

88 

 
President  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2013).  Ukaz  Presidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  №  232  ot  8 

fevralya  2013 

‘Strategiya 

razvitiya  Arkticheskoy  zony  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii 

i 

obespecheniya natsional’noy besopasnosti na period do 2020 goda’ [Decree of the President 

of  Russian Federation No. 232 of 8 February 2013 ‘Strategy for development of the Arctic 

zone of the Russian Federation and providing national security for 2020’]; 

President  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2014).  Ukaz  Presidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  №  296  ot  2 

maya  2014  ‘O  sukhoputnykh  territoriyakh  Arkticheskoy  zony  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii’ 

[Decree  of  the  President  of  Russian  Federation  No.  296  of  2  May  2014  ‘On  the  land 

territories of the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation’]; 

President  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2017).  Ukaz  Presidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  №  287  ot  27 

iyunya  2017  ‘O  vnesenii  izmeneniy  v  Ukaz  Prezidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  ot  2  maya 

2014  №  296  “O 

sukhoputnykh 

territoriyakh  Arkticheskoy  zony  Rossiyskoy 

Federatsii”’[Decree  of  the  President  of  Russian  Federation  No.  287  of  27  June  2017  ‘On 

Amendments to the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation No. 296 2 May 2014 

‘On the land territories of the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation”’]; 

President  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2019).  Ukaz  Presidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  №  220  ot  13 

maya 2019 ‘O vnesenii izmeneniy v Ukaz Prezidenta Rossiyskoy Federatsii ot 2 maya 2014 

№  296  “O  sukhoputnykh  territoriyakh Arkticheskoy zony Rossiyskoy Federatsii”’ [Decree 

of  the  President  of  Russian  Federation  No.  220  of  13  May  2019  ‘On  Amendments  to  the 

Decree  of  the  President  of  the  Russian  Federation  No.  296  2  May  2014  “On  the  land 

territories of the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation”’]. (in Russian); 

President  of  the  Russian  Federation  (2020a).  Ukaz  Presidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  №  164  ot  5 

marta  2020  ‘Ob  Osnovakh  gosudarstvennoy  politiki  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  v  Arktike  na 

period  do  2035  goda’  [Decree  of  the  President  of  Russian Federation No. 164 of 5 March 

2020  ‘On  the  Fundamentals  of  the  State  policy of the Russian Federation in the Arctic for 

2035’]; 

President  of  Russian  Federation  (2020b).  Ukaz  Presidenta  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  №  645  ot  26 

octyabrya  2020  ‘O  Strategii  razvitiya  Arkticheskoy  zony  Rossiyskoy  Federatsii  i 

obespecheniya natsional’noy bezopasnosti na period do 2035 goda’ [Decree of the President 

of Russian Federation No. 645 of 26 October 2020 ‘On the Strategy for the Development of 

the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation and ensuring National security for 2035’]; 

89 

 
Purovskiy  Municipal  District  Duma  (2011).  Resheniye  rayonnoy  Dumy  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya  Purovskiy  rayon  №  87  ot  22  dekabrya 2011 goda "Ob utverzhdenii Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  Purovskiy  rayon  do 

2020  goda,  opredeleniye  dolgosrochnoy  perspektivy  do  2030  goda'  [Purovsky  Municipal 

By-Law  No.  87  of  22  December  2011  'On  Approval of the Socio-Economic Development 

Strategy of the Purovskiy Municipal District Until 2020, Defining a Long-Term Perspective 

Until 2030]; 

Purovskiy  Municipal  District  Duma  (2018).  Resheniye  rayonnoy  Dumy  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya  Purovskiy  rayon № 174 ot 20 dekabrya 2018 goda 'Ob utverzhdenii Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  Purovskiy  rayon  do 

2030  goda'  [Purovsky  Municipal  By-Law  No.  174  of  20  December 2018 'On Approval of 

the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Purovskiy  Municipal  District   Until 

2030]; 

Rieniets,  T.  (2009).  Shrinking  Cities:  Causes  and  Effects  of  Urban  Population  Losses  in  the 

Twentieth Century. Nature and Culture, 4(3), 231-254. 

Rink, D., Couch, C., Haase, A., Krzysztofik, R., Nadolu, B., & Rumpel, P. (2014). The Governance 

of Urban Shrinkage in Cities of Post-Socialist Europe: Policies, Strategies and Actors. Urban 

Research & Practice, 7(3), 258-277; 

Rink, D., Haase, A., Grossmann, K., Couch, C., & Cocks, M. (2012). From Long-Term Shrinkage 

to  Re-Growth?  The  Urban  Development  Trajectories  of  Liverpool  and  Leipzig.  Built 

Environment, 38(2), 162-178; 

Rosstat  (2021).  Vserossiyskaya  perepis’  naseleniya  2020  goda  [All-Russian  Population  Census 

2020]. Available at: https://rosstat.gov.ru/vpn/2020 (accessed 29 March 2025). (in Russian); 

Rosstat (2024). Chislennost' naseleniya rossijskoj federacii po municipal’nym obrazovaniyam na 1 

yanvarya  2024  goda  [Population  of  the  Russian  Federation  by  municipality  on  1  January 

2024].  Available  at:  https://rosstat.gov.ru/compendium/document/13282  (accessed  19 

October 2024). (in Russian); 

Schneider,  A.,  &  Sidney,  M.  (2009).  What  Is  Next  for  Policy  Design  and  Social  Construction 

Theory?. Policy Studies Journal, 37(1), 103-119; 

90 

 
Schreier, M. (2012). Qualitative Content Analysis in Practice. Jacobs University Bremen. 

Segezha  Municipal  District  Council  (2015).  Resheniye  Soveta  Segezhskogo  munitsipal’nogo 

rayona  № 

191 

ot 

30 

sentyabrya  2015  goda 

'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Segezhskogo  munitsipal’nogo  rayona  Respubliki 

Kareliya  na  period  do  2020  goda'  [Segezha  Municipal  By-Law   No. 191 of 19 September 

2015 'On Approval of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of the Segezha Municipal 

District Until 2020]; 

Segezha  Municipal  District  Council 

(2021).  Proyekt  Resheniya  Soveta  Segezhskogo 

munitsipal’nogo  rayona  'O  Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya  "Segezhskiy  munitsipal’nyy  rayon"  Respubliki  Kareliya  na  period  do  2030 

goda' [Socio-Economic Development Draft of the Segezha Municipal District of the Karelia 

Republic Until 2030]; 

Severodvinsk City District Council of Deputies (2019). Resheniye Soveta deputatov Severodvinska 

№  215  ot  17  dekabrya  2019  goda  'O  Strategiii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  "Severodvinsk"  na  period  do  2030  goda'  [Severodvinsk 

Municipal  By-Law  No.  215  of   17  December  2019 'On the Socio-Economic Development 

Strategy of the Severodvinsk Municipal District Until 2030]; 

Severomorsk  Closed  Administrative-Territorial  Entity  Council  of  Deputies  (2019).  Resheniye 

Soveta  deputatov goroda Severomorska № 458 ot 29 yanvarya 2019 goda 'Ob utverzhdenii 

Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  ZATO  g. 

Severomorsk  na  2019-2025 gody' [Severomorsk Municipal By-Law No. 458 of 29 January 

2019  'On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Restricted 

Administrative Territorial Entity of Severomorsk for 2019-2025']; 

Shiklomanov, N., Streletskiy, D., Suter, L., Orttung, R., & Zamyatina, N. (2020). Dealing with the 

bust in Vorkuta, Russia. Land Use Policy, 93, 103908; 

Sidney, M. S. (2017). Policy Formulation: Design and Tools. Handbook of Public Policy Analysis, 

105-114. Routledge; 

Srednekolymsk Municipal District Council of Deputies (2018). Proyekt Resheniya ulusnogo Soveta 

deputatov  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  "Srednekolymskiy  ulus  (rayon)"  'O  Strategii 

91 

 
sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo  obrazovaniya  "Srednekolymskiy 

ulus  (rayon)"  [Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy  Draft  of  the  Srednekolymskiy 

Municipal District Until 2030]; 

Stryjakiewicz,  T.,  &  Jaroszewska,  E.  (2016).  The  Process  of  Shrinkage  as  a  Challenge  to  Urban 

Governance. Quaestiones Geographicae, 35(2), 27-37; 

Swinkels, M. (2020). How Ideas Matter in Public Policy: A Review of Concepts, Mechanisms, and 

Methods. International Review of Public Policy, 2(2: 3), 281-316; 

ТASS  (2024а).  Na  realizaciyu  master  planov  Arktiki  napravyat  bolee  3  trln  rublej  [More  than  3 

trillion rubles will be allocated for the implementation of the Arctic master plans]. Available 

at: https://tass.ru/ekonomika/22042121 (accessed 24 November 2024). (in Russian); 

ТASS  (2024b).  Putin  uveren,  chto  Rossiya  budet  ‘prirastat’  Arktikoj’  [Putin  is  convinced  that 

Russia ‘will expand the Arctic’]. Available at: https://tass.ru/ekonomika/21039519 (accessed 

24 November 2024); 

Taymyr  Dolgano-Nenets  Municipal  District  Council  of  Deputies  (2019). Resheniye Taymyrskogo 

Dolgano-Nenetskogo rayonnogo Soveta deputatov № 03 – 034 ot 14 fevralya 2019 goda 'Ob 

utverzhdenii 

Strategii 

sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo 

razvitiya 

Taymyrskogo 

Dolgano-Nenetskogo  munitsipal’nogo  rayona  do  2030  goda'  [Taimyr  Dolgano-Nenets 

Municipal  By-Law  No. 03 – 034 of 2 February 2019 'On Approval of the Socio-Economic 

Development Strategy of the Taimyr Dolgano-Nenets Municipal District Until 2030]; 

The Head of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) (2011). Ukaz Glavy Respubliki Sakha (Yakutia) № 975 

ot  12  oktyabrya  2011  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Respubliki  Sakha  (Yakutiya) 

'Ekonomicheskoye  razvitiye  and  innovatsionnaya  ekonomika  Respubliki  Sakha  (Yakutiya) 

na  2012-2019  gody'"  [Decree  of  the  Head  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia) No. 975 of 12 

October  2011  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  'Economic 

Development and Innovative Economy of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) for 2012-2019'"]; 

The  Head  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  (2018).  Zakon  Respubliki  Sakha  (Yakutia)  ot  19 

dekabrya  2018  goda  2077-Z  N  45-VI  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

Respubliki Sakha (Yakutiya) do 2032 goda s tselevym videniyem do 2050 goda" [The Law 

of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  No.  2077-Z  N  45-VI  of  19  December  2018  "On  the 

92 

 
Socio-economic  Development  Strategy  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  until  2032  with a 

target vision until 2050"]; 

The Head of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) (2017). Ukaz Glavy Respubliki Sakha (Yakutia) № 2165 

ot  25  oktyabrya  2017  goda  "O  gosudarstvennoy  programme  Respubliki  Sakha  (Yakutiya) 

'Obespecheniye kachestvennym zhil’yem na 2018-2022'" [Decree of the Head of the Sakha 

Republic  (Yakutia)  No.  2165  of  25  October  2017  "On  the  State  Program  of  the  Sakha 

Republic (Yakutia) 'Providing High-Quality Housing for 2018-2022'"]; 

The  Head  of  the  Sakha  Republic  (Yakutia)  (2020).  Ukaz  Glavy  Respubliki  Sakha  ot  14  avgusta 

2020  goda  №  1377  "O  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  Arkticheskoy  zony 

Respubliki  Sakha  (Yakutiya)  na  period  do  2035  goda"  [Decree  of  the  Head  of  the  Sakha 

Republic  (Yakutia)  No.  1377  of  14  August  2020  "On  the  Socio-economic  Development 

Strategy of the Arctic Zone of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) Until 2035"]; 

The State Duma of the Russain Federation (2014). Federal’nyy zakon № 172-FZ ot 28 iyunya 2014 

goda ‘O strategicheskom planirovanii v Rossiyskoy Federatsii’ [Federal Law No. 172-FZ of 

28 June 2014 ‘On Strategic Planning in the Russian Federation’]; 

Turnpenny, J. R., Jordan, A. J., Benson, D., & Rayner, T. (2015). The Tools of Policy Formulation: 

An Introduction. The Tools of Policy Formulation, 3-30. Edward Elgar Publishing; 

Turok, I., & Mykhnenko, V. (2007). The Trajectories of European Cities, 1960–2005. Cities, 24(3), 

165-182; 

Turukhanskiy  Municipal  District  (2020).  Proyekt  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

Turukhanskogo  munitsipal’nogo  rayona  do  2030  goda  [Socio-Economic  Development 

Strategy Draft of the Turukhanskiy Municipal District Until 2030]; 

Usinsk  Urban  District  Council  (2014).  Resheniye  Soveta  MO GO 'Usinsk' № 408 ot 18 dekabrya 

2014 goda 'O Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya munitsipal’nogo obrazovaniya 

gorodskogo okruga "Usinsk" na period do 2035 goda' [Usinsk Municipal By-law No. 408 of 

18 December 2014 'On the Socio-Economic Development Strategy of Usinsk Urban District 

Until 2020']; 

Usinsk  Urban  District  Council  (2020).  Resheniye  Soveta  MO  GO  'Usinsk' № 79 ot 13 oktyabrya 

2020 goda 'O Strategii sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya munitsipal’nogo obrazovaniya 

93 

 
gorodskogo okruga "Usinsk" na period do 2035 goda' [Usinsk Municipal By-law No. 79 of 

13  October  2020  'On  the  Socio-Economic  Development  Strategy of Usinsk Urban District 

Until 2035]; 

Vaguet,  Y.,  Ourng,  C.,  &  Moriconi-Ebrard,  F.  (2021).  Is  the  Arctic  Really  a  Frontier? Settlement 

Dynamics  Within  Various  Arctic  Limits  based  on  the  Arcticapolis  geohistorical  database. 

Espace populations sociétés. Space populations societies, (2020/3-2021/1); 

Van  Hulst,  M.,  Metze,  T.,  Dewulf,  A.,  de  Vries,  J.,  Van  Bommel,  S., & Van Ostaijen, M. (2024). 

Discourse,  Framing  and  Narrative:  Three  Ways  of  Doing  Critical,  Interpretive  Policy 

Analysis. Critical Policy Studies, 1-23; 

Van den Berg L., Drewett R., Klaasen L., Rossi A., & Vijverberg H. (1982). Urban Europe: A Study 

of Growth and Decline. Pergamon Press; 

Vorkuta  Urban  District  Council  (2010).  Resheniye  Soveta  MO  GO  'Vorkuta'  No.  551  ot  30 

oktyabrya  2010  goda 

'O  prinyatii  Kontseptsii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya 

munitsipal’nogo obrazovaniya gorodskogo okruga 'Vorkuta” na 2010-2015 gody i na period 

do 2020 goda' [Vorkuta Municipal By-law No. 551 of 30 October 2010 'On Approval of the 

Socio-Economic  Development  Concept of Vorkuta Urban District for 2010-2015 and Until 

2020']; 

Vorkuta  Urban District Council (2020). Resheniye Soveta MO GO 'Vorkuta' No. 764 ot 22 iyunya 

2020  g.  'Ob  utverzhdenii  Strategii  sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo  razvitiya  munitsipal’nogo 

obrazovaniya  gorodskogo  okruga  “Vorkuta”  na  period  do  2035  goda'  [Vorkuta  Municipal 

By-law  No.  764  of  22  June  2020  'On  Approval  of  the  Socio-Economic  Development 

Strategy of Vorkuta Urban District Until 2035']; 

Wiechmann, T., & Bontje, M. (2015). Responding to Tough Times: Policy and Planning Strategies 

in Shrinking Cities. European Planning Studies, 23(1), 1-11; 

Wiechmann,  T.,  &  Pallagst,  K.  M.  (2012).  Urban  Shrinkage  in  Germany  and  the  USA:  A 

Comparison of Transformation Patterns and Local Strategies. International Journal of Urban 

and Regional Research, 36(2), 261-280; 

Wilson, C. A. (2000). Policy regimes and Policy Change. Journal of Public Policy, 20(3), 247-274; 

94 

 
Yanow, D. (1995). Practices of Policy Interpretation. Policy Sciences, 28(2), 111-126; 

Yanow,  D.  (2007).  Interpretation  in  Policy  Analysis:  On  Methods  and  Practice.  Critical  Policy 

Analysis, 1(1), 110-122; 

Yushkov,  A.,  Savulkin,  L.,  &  Oding,  N.  (2017).  Intergovernmental  Relations  in  Russia:  Still  a 

Pendulum?.  Voprosy  gosudarstvennogo  i  municipal'nogo  upravleniya  [Issues  of  State  and 

Municipal Governance], (5), 38-59; 

Zamyatina,  N.  (2017).  Pul'siruyushchie  goroda  i  frontirnaya  urbanizaciya  rossijskoj  Arktiki 

[Pulsating  Cities  and  Frontier  Urbanization  of  the  Russian  Arctic].  Puti  Rossii. Sever-Yug 

[The ways of Russia. North-South], 22-30. (in Russian); 

Zamyatina,  N.,  &  Goncharov,  R.  (2020).  Arkticheskaya  urbanisatsiya:  Fenomen  i  sravnitel’nyy 

analiz [Arctic urbanization: Phenomenon and Comparative Analysis]. Vestnik Moskovskogo 

Universiteta. Seria 5. Geografya. [Bulletin of the Moscow University. Series 5. Geography], 

(4), 69-82. (in Russian); 

Zamyatina,  N.,  Goncharov,  R.,  Bogdanova,  E.,  &  Nefedova,  I.  (2017).  Fenomen  urbanizacii  v 

kompleksnom razvitii Arkticheskoj zony [The Phenomenon of Urbanization in the Complex 

Development  of  the  Arctic  Zone]. Upravlenie innovacionnym razvitiem Arkticheskoj zony 

Rossijskoj  Federacii,  [Innovative  Development  Governance  of  the  Arctic  Zone  of  the 

Russian Federation], 167. (in Russian); 

Zamyatina,  N.,  Medvedkov,  A.,  Polyachenko,  A.,  &  Shamalo,  I.  (2020a).  Zhiznestojkost' 

arkticheskih  gorodov:  analiz  podhodov  [Resilience  of  Arctic  Cities:  An  Analysis  of 

Approaches].   Vestnik  Sankt-Peterburgskogo  universiteta.  Nauki  o  Zemle  [Bulletin  of  St. 

Petersburg University. Earth Sciences], 65(3), 481-505. (in Russian); 

Zamyatina,  N.,  Suter,  L.,  Streletskiy,  D.,  &  Shiklomanov,  N.  (2020b).  Shrinking  Cities,  Growing 

Cities.  Urban  Sustainability  in  the  Arctic:  Measuring  Progress  in  Circumpolar  Cities,  3, 

49-73; 

Zamyatina, N., Nikitin, B., Sivaev, S., Savkin B., & Letunovskij, A. (2023). Szhatie. Upravlyaemoe 

i  ne  ochen':  opyt  gorodov  Severa  i  Arktiki  [Shrinkage.  Controlled  and  Uncontrolled:  The 

Experience of Cities in the North and the Arctic]. PressPass, Moskva [PressPass, Moscow]. 

(in Russian); 

95 

 
Zhou,  K.,  Koutský,  J.,  &  Hollander,  J.  B.  (2022).  Urban  Shrinkage  in  China,  the  USA  and  the 

Czech  Republic:  A  Comparative  Multilevel  Governance  Perspective.  International  Journal 

of Urban and Regional Research, 46(3), 480-496. 

96 

 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Quantitative  assessment  of  shrinkage  is  conventional  and  used  to  conceptualise  shrinking 

regions and cities and to simplify the analysis. 

1

⎤
𝑡   − 1
  * 100% 
⎥
⎦

 , 

(
⎡
𝐶𝐴𝐺𝑅  = 𝑉 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
⎢
𝑉 𝑏𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑛
⎣

)

CAGR — compound annual growth rate 
V final — final value 
V begin — beginning value 
t — time in years 

97 

 
 
 
 
Appendix 2 

Table 1. CAGR for 1989-2021 and 2010-2021 intercensal periods 

№  City name 

Population of the 
municipality, 2021 

CAGR 
(1989-2021), % 

CAGR 
(2010-2021), % 

Current shrinkage 
status 

Apatity 

49 663 

Arkhangel’sk 

306 021 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Belomorsk 

Beloyarskiy 

Bilibino 

Dikson 

Dudinka 

Igarka 

Inta 

10  Kandalaksha 

11  Kem’ 

12  Kirovsk 

13  Kola 

14  Kostomuksha 

15  Kovdor 

16  Mezen’ 

17  Mochegorsk 

18  Muravlenko 

19  Murmansk 

20  Novodvinsk 

21  Noyabr’sk 

22  Olenegorsk 

23  Onega 

24 

Pevek 

13 076 

28 897 

7418 

306 

30 154 

12 808 

21 857 

40 981 

13 138 

26 852 

34 112 

26 650 

17 182 

7 466 

42 154 

29 233 

270 384 

33 294 

100 188 

28 159 

24 922 

4 776 

25 

Polyarnyye Zori 

15 818 

-1,66 

-1,36 

-3,39 

-0,35 

-0,53 

-6,95 

-1,2 

-3,39 

-4,23 

-1,71 

-2,7 

-1,29 

-2,42 

-0,76 

-1,93 

-2,91 

-1,17 

-1,2 

-1,16 

-1,79 

-0,9 

-0,58 

-3,13 

-1,04 

-0,99 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Moderately shrinking 

Moderately shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Moderately shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

-1,95 

-0,95 

-2,15 

1,07 

-2,82 

-8,02 

-1,87 

-1,27 

-3,41 

-1,55 

-1,72 

-1,5 

-0,99 

-0,41 

-1,78 

-0,92 

-1,51 

0,74 

-1,7 

-1,27 

0,48 

-0,73 

-0,95 

-5,03 

-0,64 

98 

 
26 

Segezha 

32 371 

27 

Severodvinsk 

157 925 

28 

Severomorsk 

50 796 

29 

Srednekolymsk 

6 805 

30  Tarko-Sale 

31  Tiksi 

32  Usinsk 

33  Vorkuta 

34  Zapolyarnyy 

36 569 

7 706 

36 913 

68 425 

32 053 

-1,45 

-1,41 

-1,86 

1,31 

0,7 

-1,28 

-1,37 

-3,51 

-1,3 

-2,17 

-1,83 

-2,53 

-1,34 

-3,03 

-1,45 

-2,22 

-3,02 

-1,75 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Severely shrinking 

Source: author’s work based on population census data for 2010, 2021, and Eva et al. (2021)  

99 

 
 
 
Appendix 3 

Table 1. Number of media publications within the 2014-2019 period 

2014 

2015 

2016 

2017 

2018 

2019 

Total 

Governor of the 
ARK 

Head of the SAH 

Governor of the 
MUR 

Head of the 
KOM 

50 

35 

75 

0 

Head of the KAR 

37 

Governor of the 
KHM 

Governor of the 
YAN 

Governor of the 
KYA 

Governor of the 
CHU 

Governor of the 
NEN 

4 

3 

5 

3 

1 

16 

60 

38 

23 

30 

1 

14 

0 

0 

0 

58 

58 

1 

38 

67 

0 

14 

0 

1 

0 

52 

64 

22 

40 

20 

8 

9 

2 

13 

2 

20 

28 

63 

31 

1 

1 

2 

1 

6 

0 

78 

2 

43 

73 

6 

60 

10 

42 

4 

0 

274 

247 

242 

205 

161 

74 

52 

50 

27 

3 

Table 2. Number of media publications within the 2020-2024 period 

2020 

2021 

2022 

2023 

2024 

Total 

Governor of the 
MUR 

Governor of the 
ARK 

123 

243 

Head of the SAH 

172 

Head of the 
KOM 

103 

Head of the KAR 

74 

Governor of the 
KYA 

Governor of the 
NEN 

Governor of the 
YAN 

0 

8 

1 

163 

251 

127 

32 

16 

36 

7 

2 

303 

20 

73 

66 

24 

13 

1 

3 

940 

561 

546 

283 

185 

49 

17 

9 

313 

33 

140 

71 

18 

0 

1 

1 

38 

14 

34 

11 

53 

0 

0 

2 

100 

 
 
 
 
Governor of the 
KHM 

Governor of the 
CHU 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

3 

7 

2 

7 

6 

101 

 
 
 
Appendix 4 

Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

Table 1. Frequency of shrinkage words in Socio-Economic Development Strategies 

1. Federal Socio-Economic Development Strategies 

Government of the 
Russian Federation 
(2019, 2024) 

Government of the 
Russian Federation 
(2009) 

Government of the 
Russian Federation 
(2011a) 

Government of the 
Russian Federation 
(2011b) 

Government of the 
Russian Federation 
(2023) 

President of the 
Russian Federation 
(2008, 2020a) 

4 

7 

11 

3 

- 

0 

8 

- 

- 

- 

1 

0 

0 

2 

6 

6 

- 

0 

6 

- 

- 

- 

1 

0 

3 

9 

8 

6 

- 

0 

5 

- 

- 

- 

1 

1 

4 

4 

4 

3 

- 

0 

0 

- 

- 

- 

1 

0 

0 

2 

2 

5 

- 

0 

5 

- 

- 

- 

1 

0 

0 

0 

3 

4 

- 

0 

0 

- 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

- 

0 

0 

- 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

- 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

1 

- 

0 

102 

 
 
 
Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

President of the 
Russian Federation 
(2013, 2020b) 

Government of the 
Russian Federation 
(2022) 

1 

- 

2 

1 

0 

- 

2. Regional Socio-Economic Development Strategies 

Government of the 
Komi Republic 
(2006, 2019a) 

Government of the 
Murmansk Oblast' 
(2010, 2013b) 

Government of the 
Karelia Republic 
(2007, 2018) 

The Head of the 
Sakha Republic 
(Yakutia) (2018) 

The Head of the 
Sakha Republic 
(Yakutia) (2020) 

Administration of the 
Arckhangel'sk 
Oblast' (2008), 

4 

13 

11 

5 

4 

10 

- 

- 

7 

5 

6 

5 

2 

7 

1 

- 

- 

0 

2 

2 

9 

1 

7 

1 

2 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

- 

7 

29 

0 

0 

4 

4 

8 

16 

- 

- 

9 

7 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

- 

- 

4 

13 

0 

103 

0 

- 

2 

0 

20 

16 

8 

6 

- 

- 

6 

5 

13 

5 

5 

5 

0 

- 

4 

3 

2 

- 

- 

0 

1 

0 

13 

2 

4 

0 

5 

1 

0 

- 

3 

0 

0 

- 

- 

2 

0 

2 

5 

3 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

- 

0 

9 

0 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

 
 
Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

Governor of the 
Archangel'sk Oblast' 
(2019) 

Government of the 
Khanty-Mansi 
Autonomous Okrug - 
Yugra (2013, 2022) 

Legislative Assembly 
of the Yamal-Nenets 
Autonomous Okrug 
(2011, 2021) 

Assembly of the 
Deputies of the 
Nenets Autonomous 
Okrug (2019) 

Government of the 
Chukotka 
Autonomous Okrug 
(2014) 

Government of the 
Krasnoyarsk Kray 
(2013a, 2018) 

Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

0 

12 

0 

3 

1 

8 

0 

0 

0 

3 

0 

6 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

37 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

0 

29 

0 

2 

0 

7 

0 

0 

- 

- 

4 

11 

5 

8 

- 

- 

5 

1 

0 

3 

- 

- 

13 

5 

4 

7 

- 

- 

1 

2 

0 

3 

- 

- 

5 

8 

5 

4 

- 

- 

3 

0 

0 

4 

- 

- 

1 

6 

1 

2 

- 

- 

1 

0 

0 

0 

3. Municipal Socio-Economic Development Strategies  

Council of Deputies 
of the Apatity (2020) 

- 

15 

- 

30 

- 

8 

- 

0 

- 

13 

- 

11 

- 

2 

- 

0 

104 

 
 
Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

Arkhangel’sk City 
Mayor (2008), 
Arkhangel’sk City 
Duma (2022) 

Administration of the 
Belomorsk 
Municipal District 
(2024) 

Beloyarskiy 
Municipal District 
Duma (2014, 2023) 

Bilibino Municipal 
District Strategy 
Project (2025)6 

Taymyr 
Dolgano-Nenets 
Municipal District 
Council of Deputies 
(2019) 

Turukhanskiy 
Municipal District 
Strategy Project 
(2020)7 

Inta Urban District 

Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

1 

5 

7 

11 

5 

14 

0 

0 

2 

4 

1 

2 

1 

3 

1 

0 

- 

8 

- 

- 

- 

9 

2 

5 

0 

3 

8 

- 

8 

- 

- 

- 

4 

6 

1 

2 

11 

- 

2 

- 

- 

- 

18 

15 

19 

10 

2 

5 

0 

3 

4 

5 

- 

0 

- 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

- 

5 

- 

- 

- 

6 

0 

5 

0 

1 

2 

5 

- 

0 

- 

- 

- 

2 

2 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

- 

0 

- 

- 

- 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

2 

2 

- 

0 

- 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 There is no information about the Bilibino Municipal District Socio-Economic Development Strategy approval 
7 There is no information about the Turukhanskiy Municipal District Socio-Economic Development Strategy approval 

105 

 
 
Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

Council (2014, 2020) 

Kandalaksha 
Municipal District 
Council of Deputies 
(2018). 

Kem’ Municipal 
District Council 
(2016, 2022). 

Kirovsk Council of 
Deputies (2011), 
Administration of the 
Kirovsk Municipal 
District (2024) 

Kola Municipal 
District Council of 
Deputies (2015) 

Kostomuksha Urban 
District Council 
(2008, 2020). 

Mezen' Municipal 
District Assembly of 
Deputies (2020) 

Administration of the 
Monchegorsk 
Municipal District 
(2020, 2023) 

Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

- 

8 

- 

23 

- 

11 

0 

19 

4 

14 

2 

6 

- 

0 

0 

0 

- 

0 

10 

- 

9 

- 

9 

2 

10 

0 

0 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

2 

2 

10 

20 

2 

4 

2 

0 

8 

11 

3 

7 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

7 

- 

1 

- 

5 

11 

6 

5 

- 

- 

7 

14 

2 

19 

18 

7 

2 

- 

2 

- 

7 

6 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

- 

0 

106 

4 

1 

- 

8 

- 

4 

5 

4 

3 

0 

- 

10 

- 

2 

5 

4 

2 

1 

- 

1 

- 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

- 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

 
 
Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

Administration of the 
Muravlenko City 
(2011) 

Murmansk City 
Council of Deputies 
(2012, 2018) 

Noyabr'sk City 
Duma (2014) 

Administration of the 
Olenegorsk City 
(2019, 2022) 

Onega Municipal 
District Assembly of 
Deputies (2017) 

Administration of the 
Pevek Urban District 
(2020, 2024) 

Administration of the 
Polyarnyye Zori City 
(2019, 2024) 

Segezha Municipal 
District Council 
(2015, 2021) 

Severodvinsk City 
District Council of 

Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

5 

- 

4 

- 

5 

- 

11 

27 

10 

18 

22 

26 

20 

2 

- 

1 

2 

- 

2 

7 

3 

0 

16 

- 

10 

12 

- 

1 

15 

4 

10 

11 

9 

3 

- 

0 

1 

22 

13 

10 

20 

12 

- 

2 

5 

1 

4 

5 

- 

7 

- 

20 

- 

13 

- 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

- 

107 

4 

5 

6 

2 

- 

2 

4 

5 

- 

- 

19 

- 

2 

8 

4 

2 

8 

10 

2 

0 

0 

2 

- 

0 

0 

2 

- 

- 

2 

- 

4 

0 

0 

3 

7 

4 

4 

4 

7 

0 

- 

3 

0 

1 

- 

- 

4 

- 

0 

0 

1 

0 

2 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

- 

- 

0 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

 
 
Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

Deputies (2019) 

Severomorsk Closed 
Administrative-Territ
orial Entity Council 
of Deputies (2019) 

Srednekolymsk 
Municipal District 
Council of Deputies 
(2018)8 

Purovskiy Municipal 
District Duma (2011, 
2018) 

Bulunskiy Municipal 
District Program 
Project (2010)9, 
Bulunskiy Municipal 
District Council of 
Deputies (2018) 

Usinsk Urban 
District Council 
(2014, 2020) 

Vorkuta Urban 
District Council 

Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

- 

- 

5 

3 

1 

1 

- 

- 

16 

2 

5 

1 

- 

- 

4 

3 

3 

0 

- 

- 

0 

0 

1 

0 

- 

- 

5 

1 

2 

0 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

- 

- 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

10 

1 

7 

1 

9 

0 

0 

1 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

2 

4 

7 

8 

34 

11 

57 

5 

2 

5 

7 

0 

0 

0 

1 

5 

1 

5 

14 

2 

1 

1 

2 

0 

2 

1 

3 

0 

0 

0 

4 

8 This is a project of Srednekolymsk Municipal District Council of Deputies By-law 
9 There is no information about the Bulunskiy Municipal District Socio-Economic Development  Program approval 

108 

 
 
 
Outflow 

Decline 

Decrease 

Depopulation 

Migration loss 

Natural loss 

Fall 

Shrinkage 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

✗ 

✓ 

Documents  
(outdated / in action) 

(2010, 2020). 

Sourse: author’s work 

109 

 
 
Appendix 5 

Housing, sq. 
m 

Housing 
projection 

CAGR, % 

Housing, sq. 
m 

Housing 
projection 

CAGR, % 

Table 1. Housing construction indicators  

KOM 

MUR 

KAR 

SAH 

ARK 

KHM 

YAN 

NEN 

CHU 

KYA 

122 

24,3 

- 

520 

- 

898 

- 

- 

1 

- 

264 

40 

- 

608 

- 

1154 

- 

- 

2 

- 

10,13 

7,38 

- 

3,99 

- 

4,27 

- 

- 

10,41 

- 

234,5 

258,5 

44,8 

312 

705,1 

440 

955 

158 

20,8 

3,52 

1631 

85 

380 

- 

- 

1582 

192 

37 

- 

1800 

0,89 

7,38 

2,86 

- 

- 

7,48 

4,99 

8,58 

- 

1,42 

Sourse: author’s work 

110 

 
 
