FEDERAL STATE AUTONOMOUS EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF HIGHER 

EDUCATION 

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY 

HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS 

Faculty of Economic Sciences 

Eugene Smirnov 

Diana Maksimenko 

«The Influence of Acquirer's Credit Rating on M&A Deals Performance in Russia» 

Thesis 
Field of Study 38.04.08 Finance and Credit 

Educational programme "Strategic Corporate Finance" 

Reviewer 
Associate Professor, 
Candidate of Sciences in Economic Theory 
Suslova Svetlana Viktorovna 

Supervisor 
Associate Professor, 
Candidate of Sciences in Economics 
Grigorieva Svetlana Alexandrovna 

Moscow 2025

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of contents 

Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... 3 

1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 4 

2. Research foundations: theoretical background, specifics of assigning credit ratings to 
Russian companies and systematization of existing literature .................................................. 7 

2.1. Theoretical backgroud .............................................................................................................. 7 

2.2. Main concepts of credit ratings and features of credit rating agencies' work in the Russian 

market ....................................................................................................................................... 8 

2.3. Impact of M&A deals on the probability of acquirer’s credit rating revision: a review of 

previous studies ...................................................................................................................... 13 

2.4. Influence of acquirer’s credit rating characteristics on M&A performance: a new angle ..... 17 

3. Hypotheses and model for assessing the probability of credit rating review as a result of a 
deal and the impact of acquirer’s credit rating characteristics on M&A performance ....... 21 

3.1. Research hypotheses ............................................................................................................... 21 

3.2. Research models and framework ............................................................................................ 24 

4. Probability of credit rating review as a result of a deal and influence of acquirer’s credit 
rating characteristics on M&A performance in the Russian market in the period from 2000 
to 2022 ........................................................................................................................................... 33 

4.1. Sample selection criteria and description of the data ............................................................. 33 

4.2. Hypotheses testing and discussion of the results .................................................................... 38 

5. Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 45 

References .................................................................................................................................... 47 

Appendix ...................................................................................................................................... 52 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
     
Abstract 

The study investigates the influence of M&A deal on the probability of an acquirer’s credit 

rating downgrade and the association between an acquirer’s credit rating characteristics and the 

performance of M&A deals with a sample of 201 deals conducted during the period from 2000 to 

2022 inclusive by Russian acquiring companies. Firstly, we test the hypothesis on how deal-related 

variables affect the probability of an acquirer’s credit rating downgrade caused exactly by the M&A 

deal using probability model and applying the maximum likelihood method. The results show that 

cross-border  deals  increase  the  probability  of  an  acquirer’s  credit  rating  downgrade  by  6.5 

percentage points, while stock payment method increases the probability of an acquirer’s credit 

rating downgrade by 8.6 percentage points. Secondly, we test the hypothesis on the influence of an 

acquirer’s  credit  rating  characteristics  on  M&A  performance  applying  an  event-study  and  the 

ordinary  least  squares  method.  The  results  of  the  study  show  that  acquirer’s  credit  rating  and 

probability of subsequent acquirer’s credit rating downgrade decrease the M&A performance of 

acquirers in the Russian market. This study has a practical implication for investors as, firstly, it 

allows to predict an acquirer’s credit rating downgrade as result of the deal  which is associated 

with an increase in default risk and higher cost of debt financing. Secondly, based on a bidder’s 

credit rating characteristics investors will be able to assess whether a certain M&A deal is value 

creating or a value destroying. 

Keywords: Credit rating, M&A deals, Event study, Credit rating downgrade, National rating scale 

3 

 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 

Credit rating plays an essential role in the capital market. It is considered as an indicator of 

the relative credit quality of a company for investors and a  key determinant of the cost of debt 

financing. For these reasons, credit ratings (CRs) not only result in changes in the debt payments, 

but also affect the behaviour of the company. However, according to credit rating agencies' (CRAs) 

press releases, acquirers often put their credit ratings at risk in mergers and acquisitions (M&A) 

because these deals often result in CR downgrades as they are associated with large cash outflows 

and increased debt burden (Chung et al., 2012). For the company, a loss of a credit rating is associated 

with  a significant increase  in the cost  of debt financing and the risk of default, which  becomes 

especially important in periods of high interest rates in the economy. For investors, the risk of a 

credit rating downgrade of a company is also a negative signal and may affect stock returns. Moreover, 

the credit rating level determines the acquirer’s financial constraints, which should be also taken 

into  account  in  M&A  deal  evaluation.  The  factors  mentioned  above  suggest  that  there  is  a 

relationship between CR characteristics and M&A performance. 

It  is  a  common  knowledge  that  M&A  deals  do  not  always  bring  economic  value  to  the 

acquirer.  According  to  KPMG  research,  83%  of  mergers  were  unsuccessful  in  generating  any 

business benefit in terms of shareholder value (KPMG, 1999). The problems of the probability of 

acquirer’s  credit  rating  review  as  a  result  of  the  deal  and  the  impact  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating 

characteristics  on  M&A  deals  performance  are  widely  discussed  in  the  literature.  In  previous 

studies,  the  probability  of  CR  downgrade  after  a  merger  have  been  associated  with  certain 

characteristics of the deal, acquirer and the target company (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Chang et al., 2018; 

Chen, 2003). There is also an evidence in the academic literature that investors can predict the actual 

CR revision in advance (Kenjegaliev et al., 2016) and that CR change risk has a significant negative 

influence on M&A performance, measured by the stock market reaction to a deal announcement 

(Kiesel, Riehl, 2024). Previous studies also found that there is a significant controversial relationship 

between the absolute level of acquirer’s CR with the M&A performance (Aktas et al., 2021; Kang, 

2022; Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Blomkvist et al., 2024; Blomkvist et al., 2021; Hasan et al., 2021). 

However, all previous research in this field were conducted in developed markets. Similar 

studies have not been performed for Russia. In addition, previous researchers used international 

rating scale in their analysis (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Hasan et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2018; Chen, 

2003). The existing studies in this field have not used national rating scale for this purpose. Finally, 

4 

 
 
previous researchers have used data on whether the absolute level of CR was downgraded over a 

year following the deal announcement as the dependent variable for their models of probability of 

CR downgrade (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Chang et al., 2018; Chen, 2003). They did not identify the 

real reasons for CR downgrades, since the rating actions might have been unrelated to the deal. 

Given the abovementioned conditions and the current macroeconomic situation in Russia, 

the relevance of our research becomes evident, as there is seen an increased investors' attention to 

the level of CR, which (among other things) determines the cost of capital of the company. In the 

conditions of tight monetary policy and high interest rates in the Russian economy, the advantages 

of a company with a higher CR are obvious. At the same time, investors are currently more sensitive 

to the risk of the company’s CR downgrade, as they expect a significant increase in the debt burden 

and a higher risk of default. High interest rates also lead to extensions in credit spreads between 

issuers  of  different  credit  quality.  In  such  circumstances,  a  CR  downgrade  would  significantly 

increase the company’s debt financing costs and decrease its investment attractiveness. 

The purpose of this research is to determine the influence of acquirer’s credit rating and the 

probability of its downgrade on the M&A performance in the Russian market. 

In order to achieve this purpose, the following research tasks were identified: 

1.  Identify the factors affecting M&A performance and probability of CR downgrade and analyse 

the methods of their evaluation. 

2.  Systematize  contemporary  literature  studying  the  influence  of  credit  ratings  on  M&A 

performance  and  the  influence  of  deal  characteristics  on  the  probability  of  acquirer’s  credit 

rating downgrade. 

3.  Identify research gaps in academic literature in the field of study. 

4.  Discover the specifics of credit rating assignment by different rating agencies on international 

and national scales to construct the variable of credit rating level on a national scale. 

5.  Determine  the  influence  of  M&A  deals  characteristics  on  the  probability  of  acquirer’s  CR 

change in the Russian market in the period from 2000 to 2022. 

6.  Estimate the influence of acquirer’s credit rating on M&A performance in the Russian market 

in the period from 2000 to 2022. 

7.  Estimate the influence of the probability of acquirer’s credit rating change on M&A performance 

in the Russian market in the period from 2000 to 2022. 

5 

 
The object of the study is the M&A deals conducted in the Russian market from 2000 to 2022. 

The  subject  of  the  study  is  the  influence  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating  characteristics  on  the  market 

reaction to the acquisition announcement performed by Russian acquiring companies. 

The scientific novelty of the work is as follows: 

1.  The research in field of relationship between CRs and M&A performance is conducted for the 

first time in the Russian market. Previous studies in this field were performed for the American 

and Asian markets (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Chang et al., 2018; Chen, 2003). The Russian market 

is unique in terms of its regulation and is less efficient than developed markets. In these terms, 

CRs should eliminate information asymmetry between investors and acquirers. However, the 

unique regulatory environment of the Russian market may have caused investors to doubt the 

quality of CRs assigned. Consequently, the influence of CRs on abnormal stock returns of M&A 

deals in Russia may be different from the results obtained in studies of other markets. 

2.  This study applies an improved version of the dependent variable for the probability model – 

the CR Event, which captures whether a particular M&A deal is mentioned in press releases 

related to a CR downgrade or a negative CR forecast. This approach was not used by previous 

authors,  who  considered  the  CR  downgrade  within  a  year  after  the  deal  as  the  dependent 

variable,  regardless  of  whether  the  acquisition  was  the  reason  for  the  rating  revision  or  not 

(Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Chang et al., 2018; Chen, 2003). 

The practical implication of this research is to provide investors with an awareness of how 

the acquirer’s CR level and the threat of CR overview can affect the stock price after an acquisition 

announcement. This will allow investors to consider the company’s credit quality and possible CR 

downgrade in assessing M&A performance and making investment decisions. The study is also 

useful for creditors and managers, as it allows them to assess how the company’s acquisition plans 

will affect the acquirer’s CR. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the basic concepts of CRs 

used  in  the paper,  national  and  historical  peculiarities  of  CRAs'  activity  in  Russia,  presents  the 

literature review. Section 3 develops the main hypotheses and models for assessing the probability 

of CR downgrade as a result of the deal and the influence of CR characteristics on M&A deals 

performance.  Section  4  provides  a  description  of  the  sample  used  to  estimate  the  models  and 

describes  the  results  obtained  from  hypothesis  testing.  Concluding  section  formulates  the 

interpretation of the obtained results, the main contribution and limitations of the study. 

6 

 
 
2. Research foundations: theoretical background, specifics of assigning credit ratings to 
Russian companies and systematization of existing literature 

2.1. Theoretical background 

I. Influence of M&A deal on probability of CR downgrade 

M&A deals are one of the largest investment activities of the companies, resulting in a large 

cash outflow. M&A deals may affect the probability of a credit rating change of the acquirer, as 

they affect the key financial and operational metrics of the company, which are taken into account 

by CRAs: 

• 

• 

Increased leverage: debt-financed deals increase leverage and risk of default; 

Impact on cash flows: acquisitions can both improve (due to synergies) and deteriorate (due 

to integration costs) free cash flow (FCF) of business; 

•  Operational risks: failure to successfully integrate assets could result in reduced operational 

efficiency and profitability. 

Since the credit rating is the function of the above parameters (i.e. leverage, FCF, operating 

assets' risk) and these parameters are affected by the merger and acquisition transaction, ultimately 

the transaction also affects the credit rating. 

II. Influence of CR characteristics on M&A performance 

There are several channels through which an acquirer’s CR characteristics can affect the 

M&A deal announcement returns. They are formulated in 3 main arguments in the academic literature 

describing the mechanism and channels of the influence of CR characteristics on M&A performance: 

Financial constraints argument (Aktas et al., 2021; Blomkvist et al., 2021; Harford, Uysal, 

2014) supposes that acquirers with lower CRs have more financial constraints. Limited access to 

debt markets can lead to limited investments, that are more profitable and less costly. Therefore, 

such firms choose investment projects and perform M&A deals with the highest returns. 

In  contrast,  the  free  cash  flow  argument  (Blomkvist  et  al.,  2021;  Harford,  Uysal,  2014) 

suggests that higher-rated firms are expected to have fewer financial constraints, which provides 

them with more opportunities to realise their investment plans.  However, managers of such firms 

can deviate from the objective of growing the wealth of their shareholders and use additional capital 

7 

 
opportunities, or in other words, raise debt, to make overinvestment, which is likely to result in a 

value decline. Consequently, CRs should be negatively related to acquirer announcement returns. 

Overall, both the financial constraints and the free cash flow arguments predict a significant 

influence of access to debt markets on a firm’s ability to make investments, perform M&A deals 

and on the subsequent outcomes of those investments. In accordance with financial constraints and 

free cash flow arguments, higher CR levels reduce capital constraints for companies and facilitates 

acquisitions but declines M&A performance (Blomkvist et al., 2021). This is inconsistent with the 

assumption that highly rated companies have greater ability to fundraise, lower cost of debt and a 

more robust risk profile, which should reduce their cost of capital to deal financing and reduce the 

risks of a new acquisition, resulting in higher deal abnormal returns. 

Managing for ratings argument (Aktas et al., 2021) states that managers tend to maintain 

company’s CR, so they choose the target more carefully, which increases the efficiency of M&A 

deals. Thus, the managers' efforts to reduce the risk of a credit rating downgrade cause the company 

to engage in higher performance M&A deals. According to the managing for ratings argument, the 

higher risk of a CR downgrade as a result of a deal reduces the M&A performance. 

2.2. Main concepts of credit ratings and features of credit rating agencies' work in the 

Russian market 

A credit rating is a credit risk measure and a relative positioning of the rated entity in terms 

of the probability of default (S&P’s Rating Services, 2014; Dyachkova, 2018). CR is a key factor 

affecting the cost of debt and therefore the cost of capital of the company (Grishunin, Egorova, 

2022). In Russia, CRs above BBB+ are considered investment grade ratings. For the global market, 

a CR above BBB– on the "Big Three" international scale is considered an investment grade rating 

(S&P’s Rating Services, 2014). The distinction between investment grade and speculative grade 

ratings is important because many large organizations and pension funds are required to invest only 

in  investment  grade  instruments  (Ng,  Ariff,  2019).  Credit  ratings  can  be  assigned  to  financial 

instruments, companies or countries (i.e. sovereign CR). Hereinafter in the paper, when using a 

term Credit Rating we will refer to CRs assigned to companies, unless otherwise stated. 

The assignment of  a specific CR  level is  accompanied by a procedure  of evaluating the 

company  against  all  other  companies  rated  by  the  CRA  (Dyachkova,  2018).  A  distinguishing 

feature of CRs is the conversion of a large number of company’s characteristics and indicators into 

8 

 
one single relevant metric (Dyachkova, 2018). Credit ratings are determined based on historical 

and  current information,  as  well  as  expected future  events  and  therefore  have  predictive  power 

(Avrutskaya,  Maricheva,  2021;  S&P’s  Rating  Services,  2014).  CRAs  reduce  the  information 

asymmetry in the capital markets by holding insider information from issuers that is not available 

to the general public, particularly investors (Ng, Ariff, 2019). Based on a comprehensive analysis 

of a large amount of financial and non-financial information, the CRA provides its opinion on the 

firm’s financial stability, reliability and creditworthiness (Chen, Shih, 2006; Dyachkova, 2018). 

CRAs also assign one of the following forecasts to the current ratings: negative, positive, 

stable or developing. The forecast refers to the CRA’s view on the possible change in the rating 

level over the next 12 months. 

Rating  values  in  many  countries  are  used  as  benchmarks  for  most  securities  and  public 

companies in various industries (Dyachkova, 2018). Behr and Guettler concluded that investors 

cannot adequately assess the creditworthiness of companies on their own, and their expectations 

are often overestimated (Behr, Guettler, 2008). Therefore, investors use CR to assess credit risks 

and compare the reliability of alternative investment opportunities (S&P’s Rating Services, 2014; 

Dyachkova, 2018). Credit ratings can be considered as a bridge between borrowers (issuers) and 

lenders (investors), which reduces information asymmetry in the financial system by providing an 

independent  view  of  creditworthiness  (Hertikasari,  Artha,  2022;  Adelson,  2012).  CRs  affect 

securities markets in many ways, including an issuer’s access to capital and the structure of deals 

(Boot  et  al.,  2005).  A  high  CR  signals  to  investors  that  a  company  can  raise  lower-cost  debt 

financing,  has  a  lower  cost  of  capital,  and,  therefore,  can  use  more  investment  opportunities 

(Grishunin, Egorova, 2022). 

The foregoing highlights the significance of a company’s credit rating for equity investors. 

Academic literature provides an evidence of a relationship between CR announcements and share 

price performance, i.e. stock returns (Balcilar et al., 2021). The academic literature has for many 

years  made  efforts  to  find  a  relationship  between  excess  stock  returns  and  a  company’s  credit 

rating. Theoretically, investors expect higher returns from higher risk investments. Investing in a 

firm with a low credit rating is considered risky and should therefore generate higher excess returns 

for  the  investor,  hence  the  saying  “the  higher  the  risk,  the  higher  the  return”.  However,  some 

empirical studies demonstrate the opposite results (Lee et al., 2022). Since theory and empirical 

9 

 
evidence contradict each other, many refer to this discrepancy as the financial distress anomaly or 

the financial distress risk puzzle (Lee et al., 2022). 

Investors tend to seek CR stability to reduce the frequency and cost of adjustments in their 

portfolios (Ng, Ariff, 2019). As a rule, CRAs monitor events that may affect the level of credit risk 

of the company that has a CR from that agency. The main purpose of CRs' monitoring is to update 

the rating by detecting factors that may cause the CR upgrade or downgrade. The frequency of 

credit monitoring is determined by factors specific to a company or a group of rated organizations 

(S&P’s Rating Services, 2014). The reasons for a change in credit rating are varied. Some of them 

may be related to overall changes in the economy and business environment, while others are more 

specific  and  are  determined  by  circumstances  affecting  a  particular  industry  or  company.  A 

CRA may change the CR or revise its forecast by changing its view on the relative level of credit 

risk when it identifies factors that could affect the company’s creditworthiness. As long as a CR 

provides important information to investors, a change in the CR should result in a change in the 

market value of the issuer’s securities. This applies to both debt and equity securities. 

Confirming the above, previous studies have identified a significant negative stock market 

reaction to a CR downgrade in developed (Reddy et al., 2019; Salvador, 2017; Hu et al., 2016; 

Behr, Guettler, 2008) and developing markets (Dawar et al., 2021; Ng, Ariff, 2019; Ryu et al., 

2019) using event study methodology. Avrutskaya and Maricheva obtained similar results in the 

Russian market (Avrutskaya, Maricheva, 2021). Kenjegaliev et al. found that the German stock 

market  adjusts  stock  prices  in  advance  of  actual  CR  changes,  indicating  that  CR  revision 

announcements are expected by investors in advance (Kenjegaliev et al., 2016). 

However, there were several cases in history when the quality of assigned CRs was reduced 

and doubted by investors. The global financial crisis of 2008 challenged the credibility of CRAs as 

they failed to properly assess and disclose the inherent risks of the assets, causing the financial 

system to  be on the  brink of  collapse  (Balcilar et  al.,  2021). Previous studies  also showed that 

increased competition in the rating industry is associated with lower CR quality: CR levels go up, 

the correlation between ratings and market-implied yields declines, and the ability of ratings to 

predict default deteriorates (Jiang, Packer, 2019; Becker, Milbourn, 2011). The main reasons for 

incorrect CR assignment are: 

•  Conflicts of interest (companies pay CRAs for CRs assigned) (Financial stability forum, 

2009; International Monetary and Financial Committee, 2008; Dyachkova, 2018; Balcilar 

10 

 
et al., 2021); 

•  Shortcomings  in  the  rating  methodology  (Financial  stability  forum,  2009;  International 

Monetary and Financial Committee, 2008; Dyachkova, 2018; Balcilar et al., 2021); 

•  Failure  to  respond  in  a  timely  manner  to  changes  in  the  issuer’s  financial  position 

(Dyachkova, 2018). 

Rating scale is a system of CRA’s assessment of a company’s ability to fulfil its financial 

obligations. There are several classifications of CRs' scales, we will only describe those that were 

used in the paper. Depending on the covered period of time, there are short-term and long-term 

CRs. The rating scales are also divided into national and international ones. On a national scale, 

CRA evaluates the issuer of securities relative to companies or financial obligations in that country. 

Conversely, the international scale rating allows comparing issuers across the world. The rating of 

an issuer on the international scale depends on the sovereign rating (i.e. the risks of doing business 

in a given country are taken into account) and cannot exceed it  (Dyachkova, 2018). The CRAs 

publish  on  their  official  websites  the  methodology  of  converting  credit  ratings  applied  on 

international scale to credit ratings applied on national scales (ACRA, 2024; Expert RA, 2025). In 

this paper, long-term credit ratings on a national scale are used for analysis, which allows us to 

eliminate country risk and focus specifically on the risks associated with the company’s business 

and industry. The choice of the national scale is also based on the specifics of our sample, which 

is represented only by Russian acquirers and a share of cross-border transactions of 14%. 

The rating industry is represented by both international and national rating agencies, among 

which  the  standards  for  assigning  CRs  may  vary  significantly  (Dyachkova,  2018;  Karminsky, 

Dyachkova, 2016). The "Big Three" of foreign credit rating agencies – Moody's, Standard & Poor's, 

and Fitch – operate in the  international  credit rating services market. The "Big  Three" evaluate 

issuers,  in  fact,  from  the  investors' side  and  take  into  account  the  assigned  sovereign  ratings  in 

international CR scale. At the same time, companies that do not plan to enter foreign markets need 

rating agencies familiar with local practices and business culture, so they often resort to the services 

of  national  CRAs  (Dyachkova,  2018).  As  of  2025,  there  are  4  national  credit  rating  agencies 

accredited and registered by the Bank of Russia that are operating in the Russian market: RAEX 

(Expert RA), ACRA (Analytical Credit Rating Agency), NCR (National Credit Ratings) and NRA 

(National Rating Agency). 

11 

 
Due  to  the  lack  of  a  generally  accepted  rating  methodology,  the  assessment  of  issuers' 

creditworthiness becomes more complicated. Rating agencies often assign different credit ratings 

to the same company. A unified rating space is being developed in Russia to address this issue. The 

Bank of Russia publishes Comparison of rating scales of Russian and the "Big Three" credit rating 

agencies  (Bank  of  Russia,  2024;  Bank  of  Russia,  2021;  CBonds,  2014).  Tables  of  rating 

correspondence from international agencies are published by the Bank for International Settlements 

(Bank for International Settlements, 2014), Bank of Russia (Bank of Russia, 2021), the Ministry of 

Finance of Russia (Ministry of Finance of Russia, 2014), credit rating agencies (Expert RA, 2025) 

and CBonds (CBonds, 2024; CBonds, 2014). There are also a number of studies devoted to the 

development  of  tables  comparing  credit  ratings  assigned  by  national  and  international  rating 

agencies on international and national rating scales (Aivazian et al., 2011; Golovan, Karminsky, 

Peresetsky, 2011; Karminsky et al., 2013; Karminsky, Dyachkova, 2016; Dyachkova, 2018). 

In 2007, the market was roughly equally divided between Russian and foreign CRAs of the 

"Big Three", whose share was ensured by leadership in the banking sector, while the growth of 

national  CRAs  was  mainly  due  to  active  development  in  the  corporate  sector,  where  they  had 

sustainable competitive advantages (Dyachkova, 2018). In subsequent years, the share of national 

CRAs in the Russian CR services market has steadily increased. 

On  14  July  2017,  the  Federal  Law  “On  the  Activities  of  Credit  Rating  Agencies  in  the 

Russian  Federation”  came  into  force.  This  law  prohibited  international  rating  agencies  from 

assigning CRs on a national scale to Russian companies. Therefore, S&P, Moody's and Fitch have 

assigned only international scale credit ratings to Russian companies since 2017. In 2022, the EU 

prohibited  international  rating  agencies  from  assigning  any  ratings  and  providing  any  rating 

services to Russian Federation and Russian companies. Thus, only national CRAs currently operate 

in the Russian market, which are isolated from the influence of the "Big Three" international CRAs. 

National  CRAs are under increased pressure at  this time:  the confidence of  investors and other 

financial market participants depends on the quality of credit ratings assigned. 

In  terms  of  macroeconomic  conditions,  the  importance  of  CRs  for  investors  increases 

during periods of tight monetary policy due to high interest rates in the economy and widening of 

spreads between different CR groups. In such periods, the company’s debt burden and default risk 

increases  significantly.  A  downgrade  in  credit  rating  means  a  significant  increase  in  debt 

obligations and  possible  deterioration  of  creditworthiness  and  sometimes  even  bankruptcy.  Our 

12 

 
research sample covers several periods of tight monetary policy and significant key rate increases 

caused by crises and geopolitical instability: the global crisis in 2008-2009, geopolitical pressure 

and sanctions in 2014 and 2022. The study is especially relevant in the current conditions, as since 

2023, the Bank of Russia has followed a tight monetary policy. High interest rates led to an increase 

in credit spreads between issuers of different credit quality at the end of Q4 2024. As of December 

2024, the spread between ‘A’ and ‘BBB’ ratings was 5.8% (Bank of Russia, 2025). Consequently, 

considering all of the above mentioned, it is assumed that investors should be most sensitive to the 

credit rating and the probability of credit rating downgrade of Russian companies at this moment. 

2.3. Impact of M&A deals on the probability of acquirer’s credit rating revision: a review of 

previous studies 

After studying 150 deals in the US with deal value of $5 billion or more since 2000, S&P 

found that in 25% of cases, the acquirer’s initial CR was downgraded by one or more notches after 

the deal was announced (Ryan, 2013). In accordance with S&P’s analysis, in the long run 53% of 

buyers eventually receive a CR downgrade (Ryan, 2013). 

Chung et al. found that mergers and acquisitions announcements of the rated firms are one 

of  the  most frequent  reasons for formal revisions of  firms' credit ratings, but  only  half of them 

result in actual credit rating adjustments (Chung et al., 2012). For proposed acquisitions, CRAs 

often announce the credit rating review on the same day as the acquisition announcement or during 

the subsequent days, indicating that CRA analysts monitor the company’s business activity in a 

timely and consistent manner (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024). By putting a rating on review for downgrade, 

CRAs can influence the risk decisions of companies, including M&A deals, by signaling a possible 

downgrade if the company fails to mitigate the risk within a certain period of time. This implicit 

contract between the CRA and the company implies that failure to eliminate risks may result in a 

downgrade, leading to negative investor reaction and increased refinancing costs (Kiesel, Riehl, 

2024). 

According to S&P, the following risks lead to CR downgrades as a result of the deal: weaker 

pro-forma credit terms, lower free operating cash flow and concerns about the business risk profile 

of the combined company (Ryan, 2013). Academic literature highlighted the following reasons for 

the increased probability of acquirer CR downgrade: higher financial leverage after a merger as a 

result of debt raising for the deal financing, aggressive managerial actions explained by personal 

13 

 
benefits  for  managers  from  the  deal,  transfer  of  risk  from  the  target,  lower  credit  quality  of  a 

combined firm as a result of the deal (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Furfine, Rosen, 2011). 

With the expectation of continued strong corporate bond market and extremely low interest 

rates, more companies will put their CRs at risk by financing large M&As with large amounts of 

debt  relative  to  equity  and  cash  flow.  In  times  of  a  stable  economy,  the  difference  in  spreads 

between CRs is quite small, so companies are willing to finance an acquisition with higher debt 

burden. According to S&P, in the period of steady economic growth in the US, loose monetary 

policy and soft financing conditions during the period of 2010–2019, the downgrades of CRs to 

‘BBB’ level in 45% of times were caused by M&A-related activities (Kraemer, Gunter, 2019). All 

issuers  whose  CRs  were  downgraded  following  M&A-related  decisions  were  able  to  maintain 

investment grade CRs, mainly due to the subsequent reduction in leverage. 

There are many examples in the international and Russian practice when a relatively large 

M&A deal (i.e. its announcement) caused a revision of the CR of a company by a rating agency: 

1)  In 2006, S&P placed Pyaterochka's BB international scale CR and ruAA national scale CR 

on  CreditWatch  with  a  negative  forecast  after  the  announcement  of  acquisition  of 

Perekrestok supermarket chain for $1.6 billion, of which $300 million was to be paid in 

cash and $1.3 billion in stock (CBonds, 2006). The CreditWatch rating reflects the S&P’s 

concern about Pyatyorochka's increased consolidated financial risk following the deal. The 

CRA also expected the ND/EBITDA ratio to rise to 3.0x from 2.0x-2.5x previously. 

2)  S&P downgraded Verizon’s CR to BBB+ from A as a result of Verizon Communications 

acquisition of 45% of Vodafone Wireless for $130 billion (Kraemer, Gunter, 2019). S&P 

expected Verizon’s leverage to increase from 3.0x to 3.4x and forecasted Verizon’s “funds 

from operations to debt” to fall to the low 20% range. 

3)  Following Thermo Fisher Scientific’s announcement of its $17 billion acquisition of Life 

Technologies, S&P downgraded the company’s CR to BBB from A– (Ryan, 2013). It also 

assigned a CreditWatch rating of “CreditWatch with negative forecast”. Thermo Scientific 

did not disclose details on the deal financing, but said it will use $9 billion in debt, increasing 

the leverage to about 4.5x. 

The interest of researchers in the field of CR downgrade risk in the context of mergers and 

acquisitions is explained by the two unique characteristics of M&A deals (Kang, 2022). Firstly, 

deals  have  a  huge  value  compared  to  the  value  of  other  types  of  investments.  Therefore,  post-

14 

 
merger outcomes will have a significant impact on the default risk of the acquiring party and hence 

on  its  CR  level.  In  addition,  acquisitions  may  result  in  changes  to  the  capital  structure  as  they 

typically  require  the  acquiring  party  to  issue  debt  and/or  equity  to  finance  merger  costs.  Such 

changes in the capital structure may reduce the acquiring party’s cash balance and increase its level 

of debt, thereby increasing the risk of the company’s CR downgrade. 

In  accordance  with  managing  for  ratings  argument,  firms  aim  to  maintain  CRs  above 

certain levels in the context of M&A deals (Kang, 2022; Aktas et al., 2021; Blomkvist et al., 2021). 

Previous studies have found that managing for ratings argument is more relevant for cash-financed 

M&A deals than for stock-financed ones (Aktas et al., 2021). Stock-financed mergers are less likely 

to put downward pressure on CRs. This can be explained by the fact that most cash deals involve 

raising  debt,  which  emphasises  the  importance  of  access  to  the  debt  capital  market  for  deal 

financing provided by CRs (Harford, Uysal, 2014). 

The  earliest  researches  stated  that  corporate  mergers  should  increase  the  diversification 

effect and result in a risk mitigation of the merged company (Amihud, Lev, 1981). At the same 

time, a lot of studies showed that M&A deals increase acquirer’s default risk (Furfine, Rosen, 2011; 

Billett et al., 2004). The systematization of existing research is presented in Table 1, Appendix 1. 

The  obtained  results  of  the  previous  studies  showed  a  significant influence  of  corporate 

acquisitions on future acquirer’s CR downgrade. In particular, larger M&A deals are more likely 

to  be  associated  with  following  CR  downgrades  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024;  Furfine,  Rosen,  2011). 

Conversely, Chang et al. provided an evidence that mergers with lower relative deal value increase 

the probability of an acquirer’s CR upgrade over the next 3 to 5 years after the deal announcement 

and simultaneously decrease the probability of a CR downgrade (Chang et al., 2018). 

At the same time, contradictory results on the effect of payment method were observed: 

some authors demonstrated that stock-financed deals significantly reduce the risk of CR downgrade 

(Furfine, Rosen, 2011), while other studies claim that the payment method has no effect on the  

CR  review  after  the  deal  announcement  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024).  Chang  et  al.  showed  that  stock-

financed  deals  increase  the  probability  of  CR  upgrade  and  decrease  the  probability  of  CR 

downgrade (Chang et al., 2018). 

Previous papers also did not find a significant relationship between cross-border deals and 

the probability of CR downgrade (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024). There was only one study that found an 

15 

 
insignificant influence of M&A deals on acquirer’s CR change (Kang, 2022). However, Kang also 

found that companies facing CR downgrade risk tend to perform acquisitions that can reduce the 

risk of future CR downgrades. 

While previous literature was focused on the relationship between CRs and merger activity, 

there  is  limited  number  of  studies  on  the  effect  of  certain  M&A  deal  characteristics  on  the 

probability of an acquirer’s CR downgrade, which were conducted for the American and the Asian 

markets only (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Chang et al., 2018; Chen, 2003). There were no relevant studies 

for the Russian market. The Russian market is less efficient than developed ones and therefore the 

performance  of  CRAs  aimed  at  eliminating  information  asymmetry  between  issuers  (in  the 

acquisition  process)  and  investors,  as  well  as  their  reaction  to  M&A  deal  announcements,  may 

differ from those agencies of the developed markets. Moreover, as mentioned above, since 2017 

restrictions were imposed on the activities of  the "Big Three" international CRAs in relation to 

Russian companies, hence the CRAs' activity on the Russian market is interesting within this topic 

due to its isolation. 

Previous researchers have used data on whether the absolute level of CR was downgraded 

over  a  year  following  the  deal  announcement  as  the  dependent  variable  for  their  models  of 

probability of  CR downgrade  (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024;  Chang  et  al.,  2018; Chen, 2003).  The main 

drawback of such approach is that it does not take into account the information provided by the 

credit rating agencies press releases and therefore does not identify the real reasons for credit rating 

downgrades,  since  the  rating  actions  might  have  been  unrelated  to  the  deal  (e.g.  country  CR 

downgrade (for the international scale), parent company downgrade, industry performance decline, 

corporate governance deterioration and etc.). Thus, it is vitally important to bridge this gap in order 

to study the real cause, whether a certain M&A deal announcement led to a CR downgrade or not. 

Summing up the literature studied in this paragraph, we identified two research gaps, which 

concern the lack of research on CRs revisions as a result of the deal in the Russian market, as well 

as the lack of literature which utilizes the approach based on the ex-ante analysis of data from real 

press  releases  that  mention  CR  downgrades  as  a  result  of  a specific  deal,  rather  than  any  other 

reason for CR downgrade. In this study we are going to explicitly connect the CR revision with the 

acquisition announcement as the reason for such downgrade. 

16 

 
2.4. Influence of acquirer’s credit rating characteristics on M&A performance: a new angle 

Previous  researches  provided  an  evidence  that  numerous  determinants  can  influence 

acquirer’s M&A deal announcement returns. Specific features of abnormal returns analysis in the 

Russian market are:  а) illiquidity of stock market (Bertrand, Betschinger, 2012), b) insignificant 

or small influence of M&A deals on shareholder’s value (Appendix 1, Table 2), and c) event-study 

analysis in the Russian market is conducted on a relatively small sample as equity capital market 

is less developed than mature markets (usually the period of observation starts from year of 2000, 

while for developed markets it could be even from the beginning of 1980’s) and there is a limited 

number of Russian public companies. A sample of 150-200 observations of M&A deals  on the 

Russian market is considered to be representative (Appendix 1, Table 2). 

Further  on, we  will  focus  on  the  influence  of  an  acquirer’s  CR  characteristics  on M&A 

performance (Appendix 1, Table 3). 

Influence of an assigned acquirer’s CR on M&A performance 

Aktas et al. found a curvilinear relationship between CR and M&A stock announcement 

returns (Aktas et al., 2021). For the acquirers with non-investment grade CRs, corporate acquisition 

returns initially decline with CR growth as it expands the firm’s ability to engage in fundraising 

and overinvestment in takeovers. This confirms the financial constraints argument. In the upper 

echelons of CR range, the returns associated with M&A deal announcements increase along with 

the  CR  increase.  This  is  consistent  with  the  managing  for  ratings  argument,  since  if  such 

companies  are  trying  to  maintain  investment  grade  CR,  they  should  only  undertake  the  most 

profitable acquisitions and choose only the most attractive targets, refusing other deals unless they 

are particularly interested in takeovers. 

However, there is also a number of studies that found no significant relationship between 

CR level and M&A performance (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Hasan et al., 2021; Blomkvist et al., 2021). 

Prior studies found a significant influence on M&A performance of not a certain level of 

acquirer’s CR, but the fact that the acquirer has a CR. Harford and Uysal showed that equity capital 

markets react more negatively to acquisition announcements initiated by credit-rated acquirers, as 

it was found that credit-rated companies pay a higher premium compared to ones that do not have 

a CR (Harford, Uysal, 2014). This result confirms the financial constraints argument, as the CR 

presence and access to debt capital markets has a negative effect on M&A performance, which may 

17 

 
be related to the quality of targets. In particular, managers of non-credit-rated firms tend to pursue 

acquisitions that create higher value for shareholders compared to managers of rated firms, whose 

reputation and public image are already proved on the market. 

Blomkvist et al. provided an evidence of a positive influence of initial CR assignment on 

deal announcement abnormal returns (Blomkvist et al., 2024; Blomkvist et al., 2021). This confirms 

the value creation hypothesis: companies tend to access the debt capital market in order to create 

shareholder value through corporate acquisitions. 

Influence of probability of an acquirer’s CR downgrade on M&A performance 

Academic literature connected the acquisition announcement (the triggering event) with the 

subsequent negative acquirer’s CR event (the CRA response): CR downgrade or placing the CR 

under review for downgrade. There are a number of studies examining the impact of the probability 

of a subsequent negative CR event on the stock market reaction to the deal announcement. 

Kiesel and Riehl provided an evidence that the stock market considers the probability of an 

acquirer’s  CR  downgrade  as  deals  with  the  increased  risk  of  CR  downgrade  show  lower 

announcement  abnormal  returns  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024).  The  CR  downgrade  risk  variable  was 

calculated as the within-sample fitted probability, estimated from the probit model. The authors 

also demonstrated the lack of significant stock market response to the CRAs' announcement of a 

CR review associated with the acquisition announcement. The authors explained this observation 

by two factors: CRA’s quick reaction and the overlap with the M&A deal announcement. The result 

concludes that investors can predict the probability of a CR downgrade in advance and that the 

announcement  of  a  CR  review  for  downgrade  after  an  acquisition  announcement  is  not  a  new 

information for the stock market. 

There were also other approaches to measure an acquirer’s CR downgrade risk after a deal 

announcement. Kang argued that if a company’s broad CR has a minus sign (the so-called “minus 

firms”), it means that there is a probability of a CR downgrade to the next rating category (e.g. if a 

firm is rated “A–”, it means that the firm’s rating group may be downgraded from “A” to “BBB”) 

(Kang, 2022). The results showed that there is no significant relationship between CR downgrade 

risk and M&A deal abnormal returns. 

We  also  consider  that  the  existence  of  disagreements  in  a  company’s  CRs  assigned  by 

different  CRAs  (the  so-called  “split  ratings”)  is  an  indirect  indicator  of  the  risk  of  future  CR 

18 

 
revisions, in particular CR downgrades. If a particular CRA assigned a lower CR, this may indicate 

detected  weaknesses  and  inherent  risks  that  other  CRAs  have  not  yet  taken  into  account.  Also 

assigning  different  CRs  can  cause  investors  to  doubt  their  quality,  so  CRAs  try  to  avoid  this.  

Hasan  et  al.  showed  that  split  CRs  affect  negatively  the  M&A  performance,  which  indirectly 

indicates the negative impact of CR downgrade risk on deal announcement stock market reaction 

(Hasan et al., 2021). 

New angle on the influence of CR characteristics on M&A performance 

The literature review revealed a large number of studies on the influence of CR on the deal 

process in developed and emerging markets: choice of payment method, time to complete the deal, 

probability of deal completion, etc. However, studies on the impact of CR on M&A performance 

were only conducted for developed markets (Appendix 1, Table 3). As we mentioned above, the 

Russian CRA market is unique due to the specifics of its regulation. Also, the Russian stock market 

is  less  efficient  and  less  liquid  than  developed  markets  in  the  US  and  Europe.  Given  these 

peculiarities, the results of such a study in the Russian market may differ from previous researches. 

Thus, we conclude that the lack of research in this field in the Russian market is a research gap 

and  the  novelty  of  our  study  consists  in  the  fact  that  no  one  has  previously  conducted  such  an 

analysis for emerging markets. 

There is only one paper (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024) in the US market that examines the influence 

of the estimated probability of a CR downgrade as a result of the deal on abnormal deal returns. 

This approach assumes that investors are able to predict a future CR change (future event) based 

on  available  data  at  the  time  of  the  M&A  deal  announcement  (trigger  event).  The  authors  also 

studied the influence of the CR review for downgrade variable as a result of the deal. CR review 

for downgrade is an ex-post variable because it takes some time for the CRA to issue a press release 

and therefore this variable is outside the time horizon of the event study. This means that this CR 

review information is not known to investors at the time of the deal announcement and therefore is 

not implied in the abnormal return. Consequently, the Kiesel and Riehl results showed that this 

variable is not significant (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024). It might be possible to obtain different results for 

this variable calculated using a probit model similar to the CR downgrade variable. In this case, all 

the information  for estimating the probability of  CR review for downgrade would be known to 

investors in advance at the time of M&A deal announcement and would not extend beyond the 

time horizon of the event study. In this study we construct a new variable accounting for negative 

19 

 
CR  events  in  a  wide  sense  (Section  3.2)  and  estimate  the  probability  based  on  the  information 

available to investors at the time of the deal announcement. 

Moreover,  as  we  mentioned  earlier,  the  authors  looked  at  the  fact  of  rating  changes  

(CR downgrade) over a certain period after the deal (1 year, 3 years, 5 years) without determining 

the specific reasons for the rating change, which may be unrelated to the deal. The absence of deep 

analysis to identify the reasons for the post-merger rating change in this field is a research gap. 

The novelty of our study is that we examined data from more than 200 press releases on companies' 

CR changes to identify in which cases M&A deal was the real reason for subsequent CR change 

(Section 3.2). 

20 

 
 
 
3. Hypotheses and model for assessing the probability of credit rating review as a result of a 
deal and the impact of acquirer’s credit rating characteristics on M&A performance 

3.1. Research hypotheses 

To  efficiently  capture  the  full  effect  of  credit  ratings'  influence  on  M&A  deals 

performance we first need to remind us of the channels of transmission of credit rating impact on 

acquisition  announcement.  By  the  full  effect,  as  discussed  in  the  Theoretical  background,  we 

mean not only the absolute level of acquirer’s credit rating (e.g. ‘AAA’ or triple-A), but also the 

probability of change of such rating as a result of the deal. For an investor reacting on an M&A 

announcement, it is vital not only the credit quality  of the issuer (i.e. its credit rating), but also 

the  probability  of  its  loss  after  the  M&A  deal  is  announced  and  completed.  So,  first  we  will 

propose  what  determines  the  probability  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating  change  as  a  result  of  the 

acquisition (the first set of hypotheses) and after that we address the complete impact of credit 

rating characteristics on M&A deals performance (the second set of hypotheses). 

Based  on  the  previous  studies,  we  distinguish  two  categories  of  hypotheses:  H1.1–H1.3 

concern  the  impact  of  M&A  deals  characteristics  on  probability  of  acquirer’s  CR  downgrade,  

H2–H3 concern the influence of acquirer's CR characteristics on M&A performance. 

Hypotheses on the influence of M&A deals characteristics on probability of acquirer’s CR downgrade 

According to data from press releases and a review of academic literature, one of the most 

common reasons for a rating revision as a result of  the  deal is an increase in company’s debt 

burden,  higher  financial  leverage  and  deterioration  of  debt  covenants  (Net  Debt/EBITDA, 

Interest coverage ratio and etc.). This applies primarily to debt-financed corporate acquisitions. 

In increases the default risk and results in a credit rating revision. Other reasons include declining 

free cash flow and increased  risk of the operating assets of business  as a result of  a high deal 

associated costs, synergies overvaluation and business integration issues. 

Large  size  of  M&A  deal  implies  a  large  bidder’s  cash  outflow.  Relatively  large 

acquisitions generally are not capable of being 100% financed by the company’s own cash on its 

balance sheet. Therefore, they tend to be financed by either equity or debt. According to S&P 

research, large deals are often debt-financed (Ryan, 2013). Raising debt by an acquirer increases 

its financial  leverage and risk  of default.  Additionally, if the deal is  financed  by a  significant 
21 

 
 
share of the acquiring party’s own cash balance, it implies a cash balance reduction which  also 

negatively affects debt covenants (ND/EBITDA). So, in either of the result, a large cash outflow 

caused  by  a  large  size  of  the  M&A  deal  a  significant  deteriorating  factor  for  the  acquirer’s 

financial position. Moreover, if it is an acquisition of a large business, there are significant asset 

integration  risks,  which  negatively  affects  the  bidder's  risk  profile  and  hence  increase  CR 

downgrade risk. A literature review in the USA market showed that deal value is a main factor 

contributing to the acquirer's CR downgrade (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Furfine, Rosen, 2011). Given 

the abovementioned, larger M&A deals increase the acquirer’s default risk and we assume that: 

H1.1: Relative size of M&A deals has a positive influence on probability of credit rating 

downgrade for Russian acquirers 

The  commonly  used  M&A  deal  payment  methods  are  either  cash  or  stock,  and  their 

combinations. Cash payment assumes that the deal can be financed either by own cash balance 

or with debt. Harford and Uysal argue that most cash payment deals are debt financing (Harford, 

Uysal, 2014). At the same time, debt attraction increases the financial leverage of the acquirer 

and the risk of credit rating downgrade, while financing and payment by  stocks (outstanding or 

newly issued shares) has no negative impact on the company’s debt burden and the risk of credit 

rating  downgrade.  Financially  distressed  firms  can  still  use  their  stocks  as  a  payment  method 

even if they cannot raise additional debt capital, and  such equity-financed acquisitions are less 

likely  to  put  pressure  on  the  credit  rating.  Chang  et  al.  found  that  the  stock  payment  method 

significantly reduces the risk of credit rating downgrade (Chang et al.,2018). Summarising the 

above, the stock payment method reduces the risk of bidder’s credit rating downgrade. 

H1.2: Stock payment method of M&A deals has a negative influence on probability of 

credit rating downgrade for Russian acquirers 

The credit rating is assigned based on the company’s forecasted default risk, assessed on 

the basis of the data available at the time of CR assignment. The credit rating may be revised in 

the presence of significant events that may affect the default risk. These significant events include 

a cross-border M&A deal as the acquirer’s current rating reflects its business profile available to 

the agency at the time of the rating assignment. When a company enters a new foreign market, 

the bidder faces additional risk exposure, which was not taken into account in the assessment of 
22 

 
 
 
the actual rating. Performing cross-border deal, the acquirer is under the influence of new risks: 

country risk (in particular, political and regulatory risks), currency risk and etc. Moreover, cross-

border deals increase significantly the risk of new assets integrating due to cultural differences. 

Taking this into account, it is possible that a cross-border deal increases the probability of a CR 

downgrade. Although Kiesel and Riehl study did not find a significant impact of cross-border deals 

on  the  probability  of  an  acquirer’s  credit  rating  downgrade  in  the  USA  market  (Kiesel, Riehl, 

2024), we consider that for a Russian acquirer cross-border deal is more risky due to differences 

in currency risks (volatility of the Russian ruble, while the US dollar is the reserve currency), 

geopolitical risks and differences in managers' expertise in similar deals. Therefore, cross-border 

acquisitions will put downward pressure on the risk of a CR change in the Russian market. 

H1.3: Cross-border M&A deals have a positive influence on probability of credit rating 

downgrade for Russian acquirers 

Hypotheses on the influence of acquirer’s credit rating characteristics on M&A deals performance 

Now we proceed to  the hypotheses concerning the influence of acquirer’s credit rating 

characteristics on M&A performance. We define credit rating characteristics as both the absolute 

credit rating level and the probability of an acquirer’s CR downgrade as a result of the deal. 

Consistent  with  the  financial  constraints  (Aktas  et  al.,  2021;  Blomkvist  et  al.,  2021; 

Harford,  Uysal,  2014)  and  free  cash  flow  (Blomkvist  et  al.,  2021;  Harford,  Uysal,  2014) 

arguments, as CRs increase, the financial constraints become weaker and acquirers have more 

overinvestment  opportunities  and  the  overall  quality  of  corporate  acquisitions  decline.  

In contrast, bidders with lower CR level have limited access to debt capital  markets, have less 

investment opportunities and therefore more carefully choose targets and perform M&A deals, 

yielding higher returns. Aktas et al. found a negative influence of CR on M&A performance for 

the non-investment grade credit ratings (Aktas et al., 2021). According to the financial constraints 

and free cash flow arguments and the obtained in the previous research results, we expect that 

credit rating reduces the M&A performance. 

H2: Acquirer’s credit rating has a negative influence on the performance of M&A deals 

for Russian acquirers 

23 

 
 
 
According to managing for ratings argument, companies are making efforts to avoid credit 

rating downgrade (Aktas et al., 2021). As a result, such acquirers tend to approach more careful 

target choice and perform M&A deals with higher performance. On the other hand, investors are 

able to predict the credit rating downgrade risk resulting from the deal, which would be negatively 

reflected  in  stock  returns,  as  it  would  indicate  a  deterioration  of  the  company’s  risk  profile, 

increased probability of default and additional debt financing costs. Previous studies found that an 

acquirer’s credit rating revision risk reduces M&A deal associated abnormal stock returns (Kiesel, 

Riehl,  2024).  Given  the  abovementioned,  probability  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating  downgrade  is 

assumed to be negatively affecting the M&A deals performance. 

H3: Probability of acquirer’s credit rating downgrade has a negative influence on  the 

performance of M&A deals for Russian acquirers 

3.2. Research models and framework 

Empirical  research  in  this  paper  is  carried  out  in  two  steps.  During  the  first  step,  the 

probability of change of the acquirer’s credit rating as a result of the deal is tested and investors ' 

expectations  are  determined.  In  the  second  stage,  the  influence  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating  on 

M&A deals performance is assessed. This paragraph describes both the probit model used in the 

first step and the regression model with the event study used for the second step. 

3.2.1.  Probability of credit rating change (binary choice model) 

So, first we will determine how to measure the expectations of investors about the change 

of the credit rating in acquisition in order to subsequently  employ them in the  second step of 

analysis. To define the expectations of investors about the probability of change of the credit 

rating, we first need to elaborate on what is the change of the credit rating in connection with a 

certain M&A deal by itself. Following the work of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), where a similar concept 

was developed, we will introduce the following variable: 

Credit Rating Event (CR Event) – binary variable that takes the value of «1» if a negative 

press release about the acquirer’s credit rating was issued due to the announcement of the M&A 

deal,  0  otherwise.  So,  if  a  certain  credit  rating  agency  issued  a  negative  statement  about  the 

acquirer regarding the potential acquisition, the following deal receives a «1» in CR Event. This 

approach is  more  profound  and  beneficial to  the  approach  of  (Kiesel, Riehl,  2024),  where  the 
24 

 
 
authors simply gathered the data on post-M&A credit ratings' downgrades in one year following 

the acquisition. Such downgrades may not have been exactly done as a result of the deal. So, 

contrary to the work of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), we have explicitly and accurately analyzed each of 

the credit rating agencies' press releases and have made a final conclusion about the change of 

the acquirer’s credit rating only if a direct mentioning of the deal was made in the press release. 

See examples of such press releases in the Appendix 2 (Exhibit 1). An additional comment has 

to be made in that we have accounted not only for the credit rating downgrade as the ultimate 

negative  reaction  of  the  credit  rating  agency,  but  also  for  other  negatively  associated  rating 

actions,  such  as  putting  the  acquirer  into  the  credit  rating  watch  list,  change  of  the  rating’s   

outlook or placing the ratings on review for possible downgrade. Such rating actions have been 

classified as having the same nature to the credit rating downgrade, and thus the respective deals 

also received «1». That is, we have named this variable the  Credit Rating Event, not the Credit 

Rating downgrade, since it is the reflection of a negative credit rating actions in a wider sense. 

The variable introduced in the previous section is a measure of probability of acquirer’s 

credit  rating  change  ex-post,  since  it  is  the  actual  data  gathered  from  a  real  press  releases  and 

announcements  observed  in  the  market.  To  make  an  ex-ante  estimate  of  this  probability,  or  in  

other words, to get the expectations of investors about the change of the credit rating, we need to 

construct  a  binary  choice  model  describing  this  probability,  where  the  CR  Event  will  act  as  a 

dependent variable. The estimated probability from this model will yield the investors' expectations, 

which will be eventually used as the determining factor of the M&A performance. 

To measure the probability of change of the credit rating of the acquirer due to the M&A 

announcement, we will develop the following Credit Rating Event binary choice model: 

ℙ 

(CR Event = 1) =     (β0 + β1 Relative deal size + β2 Payment method + β3 Cross-border + 

𝔽 

0 

                    + β4 ΔKey rate + β5 Public Target + β6 ln (Revenue) + β7 ROE ) 

+4 (1) 

Description of the independent (X) and control variables (Controls) picked for the model 

will  be  provided  in  the  following  section.  Regarding  the  format  of  the  data  and  the  estimation 

method,  we  will  use  the  probit  model  and  the  maximum  likelihood  estimation  procedure.  The 

underlying functional form of the probit regression equation implies the cumulative distribution 

function of the standard normal distribution, which is: 

𝔽(𝑥) =
𝔽 

1

ξ2𝜋

𝑥

න 𝑒−𝑡2/2
−∞

ⅆ𝑡 

(2) 

25 

 
According to our hypotheses, the independent variables (determinants) of the probability 

of change of the credit rating due to the acquisition are in fact the deal-related variables, reflecting 

the different characteristics of the proposed M&A deal, namely: 

Relative  deal  size  –  ratio  of  the  deal  value  to  the  market  capitalization  of  the  acquiring  

firm 4 weeks prior to the acquisition announcement (Aktas et al., 2021). 

Payment method – binary variable that takes the value of 0 for deals where the method of 

payment is 100% cash, 1 otherwise (Chang et al., 2018). 

Cross-border – binary variable that takes the value of 1 for acquisitions of non-Russian 

target firms, 0 otherwise (Chirkova, Chuvstvina, 2013). 

In  order  for  the  model  to  be  correctly  specified  and  statistically  significant,  we  also  

control for other various and important factors, following the previous studies: 

ΔKey  rate  –  difference  between  the  key  rate  of  the  Bank  of  Russia  on  the  day  of  the 

acquisition  announcement  and  180  days  prior  to  the  acquisition  announcement  (Rogova, 

Novichkov, 2020; Xin et al., 2015). A positive value of this variable (Δ > 0) indicates a tightening 

of monetary policy, as the key rate was increased since the last 180 days, while a negative value 

(Δ < 0), on the contrary, indicates a loosening of monetary policy, since the key rate was decreased 

in the last 180 days. This variable controls for monetary policy conditions and is a macroeconomic-

level type of control variables. 

Public Target – binary variable that takes the value of 1 if the target is a public company,  

0 otherwise (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024). This variable controls for complexity in assigning a credit rating 

to a combined firm after the acquisition and relates to a target-level type of control variables. 

ln (Revenue) – natural logarithm of acquirer’s sales in the year preceding the acquisition 

announcement (Blomkvist et al., 2024). This variable controls for size of the acquirer and relates to 

a firm-level type of control variables. 

ROE  –  net  income  to  book  value  of  equity  of  the  acquirer  in  the  year  preceding  the 

acquisition  announcement  (Chen,  2003).  This  variable  controls  for  profitability  of  the  acquirer, 

taking into account its leverage which is a critical factor in credit rating assignment process, and 

relates to a firm-level type of control variables. 

26 

 
After the respective model with the independent and control variables described above be 

estimated, we will be able to receive the predicted probability of the credit rating change of the 

acquirer as a result of the deal: 

                    |     ̂   𝔽 
ℙ 

(CR Event = 1) =     (β0 + β1 Relative deal size + β2 Payment method + β3 Cross-border + 

.̂             .̂                                        …          

.̂ … + β7 ROE ) 

 (3) 

The equation above is in fact the ex-ante probability, i.e. the expectations of investors about 

the probability of change of the credit rating of the acquirer due to the M&A deal: 

                    |     ̂   𝔼 (CR Event ) 
ℙ 

(CR Event = 1) =     (β0 + β1 Relative deal size + β2 Payment method + β3 Cross-border

 (4) 

The  concept  introduced  and  articulated  above  will  give  us  the  investors'  expectations,  

which we will use as the determining factor of the M&A performance in the subsequent section. 

To sum up the first step of the research, we will be able to test the hypotheses H1.1–H1.3 using the 

binary  choice  model  expressed  in  the  equation  (1)  and  also  to  construct  the  expected  

probability of Credit Rating Event expressed in the equation (4) used as the M&A performance 

determinant. 

3.2.2.  Event study and model for assessing the impact of acquirer’s credit rating on M&A  

deals performance 

The second stage is devoted to the main research question of the paper – whether credit 

ratings influence the M&A performance of acquirers and what is this influence. The foundations 

laid out in this section will help to reveal this relationship and evaluate its consistency. But before 

we proceed with the general framework and the model to examine this dependence, we first need 

to quickly refer to what is the M&A performance and how to measure it. 

Following the bulk of authors analyzed in the literature review, the M&A performance of 

deals in this paper will be measured using the event study (Aktas et al., 2021, Kiesel, Riehl, 2024, 

and others). Event study analysis was chosen due to the following reasons and has several benefits: 

1)  It is one the most popular methods to assess the M&A performance and is a classical method 

of corporate finance studies proven by decades of research (MacKinlay, 1997). It is used 

both in the developed and the emerging markets (Skvortsova et al., 2013; Grigorieva, 2020); 

2)  It  directly  measures  shareholder  value  created  through  stock  price  performance.  Stock 

prices immediately react and reflect all the news and events related to the company, and 

27 

 
represent the value of the expected  future cash flows. Therefore, it is a forward-looking 

measure of value creation (Brealey, Myers, 1980); 

3)  Alternative methods like accounting studies may be subject to manipulation by companies 

and the use of those methods could be complicated by differences in accounting standards 

and principles, used in different countries (Healy, Palepu, 1992). 

However, one of the key drawbacks of this approach is associated with its assumptions. 

Event  study  implies  the  efficiency  of  the  market  or,  the  so-called,  efficient  market  hypothesis 

(EMH).  The  questionable  moment  here  lies  in  the  use  of  this  methodology  on  the  emerging 

markets, e.g. Russia, since these markets, generally, are not considered to be efficient as they are 

developing. However, there are instances of failure of the EMH even on the developed markets 

(Titan, 2015), so that, rigorously speaking, the proposed approach during certain periods might not 

be used even there. Despite that, given that the main focus of this paper is the credit rating as the 

determining factor for the M&A performance, the use of an alternative method, i.e. the accounting 

studies, becomes impossible, since it is roughly indefinable on how to measure the credit rating 

impact  on  the  accounting  statements.  The  provided  arguments  conclude  that  we  will  stick  to  

the event study. 

The  baseline  theoretical  foundations  for  the  event  study  and  the  cumulative  abnormal 

returns are laid out in (MacKinlay, 1997). In this paper we will follow the guidelines stated thereof, 

while here we will only formulate the key inputs that we implied in our analysis: 

The  actual  (observed)  return  of  stock  prices  and  market  index  is  calculated  using  the 

logarithmic returns formula as in (Skvortsova, Vershinina, 2021): 

𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛                                                                             (5) 

ቇ 

ቆ

𝑃𝑖,𝑡
𝑃𝑖,𝑡
𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1
𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1

The normal (expected) returns are predicted using the market model following the approach 

used in the research (Hasan et al., 2021; Blomkvist et al., 2024; Kiesel, Riehl, 2024): 

𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + β𝑖𝑅𝑚,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                                                         (6) 

where 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 is the return of a market index on day 𝑡; 𝛼𝑖 – the constant part of the return of 

company 𝑖 not explained by the market; β𝑖 – the slope coefficient or the sensitivity of company 𝑖 
to the market; 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 is the random error and 𝑡 ∈ [𝑡1; 𝑡𝑛] is the estimation period. 

28 

 
 
The estimation period is 250 trading days prior to the event window following the previous 

studies  (Blomkvist  et  al.,  2024;  Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024).  This  corresponds  to  a  year  over  the  event 

window, since a standard calendar year (365 days) includes on average 252 trading days. Regarding 

the benchmark for the market index we will use the MOEX Russia index as the most commonly 

used  benchmark  in  studies  conducted  on  the  Russian  market  (Kupatadze,  Rogova,  2019; 

Zagudalova et al., 2024). 

After the OLS regression is run on the equation (6), the estimated coefficients of alpha and 

beta are obtained. The next step is to calculate the abnormal return (𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝜏) for each day in the event 

window and for each M&A deal announcement: 

𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝜏 = 𝑅𝑖,𝜏 − 𝑅𝑖,𝜏 = 𝑅𝑖,𝜏 − 𝛼𝑖 − β𝑖𝑅𝑚,𝜏                                          (7) 

.̂                  .̂                                        

     |̂ 

where 𝑅𝑖,𝜏 is the actual return and 𝜏 ∈ [𝑇1; 𝑇𝑘] is the event window. 

…  

We use a 7-day [–3;+3], 11-days [–5;+5], and 21-days [–10;+10] event windows following 

the  previous  research  carried  out  in  emerging  markets  (Reznichenko,  2022;  Zagudalova  et  al., 

2024).  Theoretically,  the  length  of  the  event  window  depends  on  such  characteristics  like 

information  efficiency,  "rumours  spread"  and  etc.  Developing  markets,  in  this  respect,  are 

considered to be lower information efficient compared to developed markets, and thus require a 

longer time to fully encapture the impact of certain event in the stock price. Therefore, we also take 

a greater length of the event window (up to 21-days) in our research. 

The final step is to calculate the cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) of each deal for each 

of the selected event windows: 

𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖 = ∑ 𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝜏

𝑇𝑘

𝜏=𝑇1

(8) 

As by the definition, the cumulative abnormal returns measure the stock market reaction to 

the  deal  announcement.  This  is  the  measure  of  M&A  performance.  A  positive  value  of  CAR  

(> 0) indicates that the market prices of shares have grown up as a result of the news about M&A 

and  the  market  reacted  positively  to  the  deal.  A  negative  value  of  CAR  (<  0),  on  the  contrary, 

implies that the share prices have dropped due to the deal and the deal was negatively perceived by 

the market. 

Finally, after we have defined the measure of M&A performance, we can proceed to the 

concluding part of this section – identifying the determinants of M&A performance. To assess the  

29 

 
 
impact of acquirer’s credit rating on M&A performance, we will construct the following regression  

model, where cumulative abnormal return will act as a dependent variable: 

CAR = β0 + β1 Credit Rating + β2    (CR Event) + β3 Relative deal size + 
𝔼 

                       l+ β4 Payment method + β5 Cross-border + β6 D/E + β7 P/E + β8 ROA + ε 

(9) 

The model is estimated using the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) method. The type of data 

is the cross-sectional, since each M&A deal has its own announcement date. 

According  to  our  hypotheses,  we  introduce  the  following  independent  variables 

encountered  in  the  work  of  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024),  but  constructed  and  adopted  with  certain 

improvements to the latter, elaborated here on: 

Credit Rating – acquirer’s credit rating on the day of the deal announcement measured on 

a 19-step numerical scale (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Hasan et al., 2021). See the Appendix 2 for the 

rating-to-number  scale  conversion  table  (Exhibit  2).  In  this  paper  we  used  national  scale  credit 

ratings assigned by different rating agencies (international CRAs: S&P, Fitch, Moody’s; Russian 

national  CRAs: ACRA,  RAEX) converted to  a common base  rating scale. First of all, for each 

observation we collected all of the available at the time of the M&A announcement credit ratings 

assigned by each of the 5 rating agencies listed above. This approach allowed us to maximize the 

sample, as the use of a single rating agency would have significantly cut the number of observations 

since a certain company may have no rating from the picked CRA, but has a rating in another CRA. 

Secondly, if the company did not have an assigned national scale CR, we translated the international 

scale  CR  into  a  national  one  using  the  international  and  national  scale  correspondence  tables 

provided by the rating agencies. An example of such correspondence table is presented in Appendix 

2, Exhibit 3 and in the reference list (S&P, 2017; S&P, 2018). We also took into account that due 

to the sovereign CR revisions over the period (country risk changes), the translation scales also 

changed, so we used the relevant correspondence table for each year. Thirdly, we aggregated the 

obtained CRs from different rating agencies to a single base scale. In most cases, CRs are consistent 

and have a high degree of correlation (Chang et al., 2018), but sometimes there are some discrepancies 

in CRs. In case of such discrepancies, we performed the 4th step (optional): (Stage 1) If assigned 

ratings from 2 or more CRAs matched, the base scale used that rating level. (Stage 2) If the ratings 

from different CRAs were different, the most recently revised rating was used in the base scale (if 

it was revised 6 months prior to the deal). (Stage 3) If the ratings did not match and one of the ratings 

had not been revised in the 6 months prior to the deal, the most conservative rating was taken. 

30 

 
 
There are several papers that used CRs from different rating agencies in their research (Chen, 2003; 

Lee et al., 2022) and developed a methodology to align CRs from different CRAs to a base scale 

(Dyachkova, 2018). It is also a common practice to use Moody's (S&P) rating when there is no 

S&P (Moody's) rating, assuming they are substituted (Yu F., 2005; Butler, 2008). 

𝔼 
   (CR Event) – binary variable that takes the value of 1 if investors expect a change of the 

credit rating of the acquirer as a result of the deal, 0 otherwise (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024). The variable 

reflects the investors' expectations about negative rating actions and is the estimated probability of 

acquirer’s credit rating change due to the M&A deal (see equation (4)|). For details on the variable 

construction refer to the previous section (2.2.1). 

As in the previous section, we also introduce the control variables in order for the model to 

be adequate, obtain good statistical properties and control for other significant factors: 

Relative deal size – see page 26 for definition. This variable controls for the size of the deal 

and is a deal-related type of control variables. 

Payment  method  –  see  page  26  for  definition.  This  variable  controls  for  the  use  of 

alternative methods of payment rather than cash (e.g. equity raise, attracting debt), which means a 

higher debt burden or an equity dilution, and is a deal-related type of control variables. 

Cross-border  –  see  page  26  for  definition.  This  variable  controls  for  geographical 

diversification and is a deal-related type of control variables. 

D/E  –  ratio  of  the  total  liabilities  of  the  acquirer  in  the  year  preceding  the  acquisition 

announcement  to  the  market  capitalization  of  the  acquirer  4  weeks  prior  to  the  acquisition 

announcement  (Grishunin,  Egorova,  2022).  This  variable  controls  for  financial  leverage  of  the 

acquirer and is a firm-related type of control variables. 

P/E – price-to-earnings multiple, ratio of the acquirer’s stock price 1 month before the event 

window to the EPS of the acquirer in the year preceding the acquisition announcement (Chirkova, 

Chuvstvina, 2013). This variable controls for market valuation of the acquirer and is a firm-related 

type of control variables. 

ROA  –  net  income  to  total  assets  of  the  acquirer  in  the  year  preceding  the  acquisition 

announcement  (Skvortsova,  Vershinina,  2021).  This  variable  controls  for  profitability  of  the 

acquirer and is a firm-related type of control variables. 

31 

 
The model described above will help us to reveal the main question of the paper, concerning 

the influence of acquirer’s credit rating characteristics on M&A performance (both the absolute 

level of CR and the probability of CR change as a result of the deal). To summarize the methodology 

used on the second stage of the empirical research, we will be able to test the hypotheses H2 and H3 

using the regression model expressed in the equation (6). 

32 

 
 
 
4. Probability of credit rating review as a result of a deal and influence of acquirer’s credit 
rating characteristics on M&A performance in the Russian market in the period from 2000 
to 2022 

This is the concluding part of the paper which represents the data and the empirical results 

of the research. We first describe the data collection process and the sources for financial and other 

necessary information. In the second step, the proposed hypotheses are tested and the models from 

the previous section are evaluated, afterwards the results are discussed. 

4.1. Sample selection criteria and description of the data 

For further research, a sample of mergers and acquisitions conducted on the Russian market 

was formed. As for the sources used in this paper, there is no single database or resource in which 

all the needed information would be accurately stored and collected. 

Initially, we used the Refinitiv Eikon database which provided us with over 38,5 thousand 

M&A transactions conducted worldwide. We further ensure that the deals in our sample fit into the 

following criteria: 

1)lTransaction  is  conducted  on  the  Russian  market.  We  define  such  transactions  after 

(Chirkova, Chuvstvina, 2013) as having the acquirer to be the Russian company, so that either the 

domestic deals (Russian Acquirer – Russian Target), or the out-bound deals (Russian Acquirer – 

non-Russian  Target)  fall  into  our  sample.  We  do  not  consider  the  in-bound  deals  (non-Russian 

Acquirer – Russian Target). 

2)lTransaction is announced and completed during the period of 01/01/2000 – 01/02/2022. 

3)lAcquirer  is  a  publicly  traded  company  with  a  credit  rating  at  the  date  of  the  deal 

announcement. 

4)lSize of the deal is over $1 million. We set this restriction in order to eliminate low value 

transactions,  as  small  transactions  are  considered  as  having  an  insignificant  impact  on  stock 

performance and can be neglected (Teti et al., 2017). 

5)lAcquirer  owns  an  equity  stake  of  more  than  50%|+|1  share  of  Target  after  the  deal 

(Skvortsova, Vershinina, 2021). 

6)lAcquirer does  not  belong to  financial  (banking)  sector.  Financial  industry operates at 

different  regulations  and  make  their  financial  statements  under  different  accounting  rules 

(Skvortsova, Vershinina, 2021; Zagudalova et al., 2024). 

33 

 
After removing the outliers, our sample consisted of 201 M&A deals which yields the final 

sample for empirical research. 

In addition to the Refinitiv Eikon database, which provided us with the set of deals and the 

financial characteristics of Target and Acquirer needed for construction of the control variables 

(e.g. EPS, Revenue, Net income, Total Assets, Deal value), we also used the Investing.com and 

mfd.ru to download the share prices of acquiring company to evaluate CAR. The MarketCap of 

acquirer used in the denominator of some of control variables was calculated based on the share 

prices used above and the total number of shares outstanding from Refinitiv. Regarding the database 

for  the  press  releases  and  news  announcements  of  credit  rating  agencies  about  acquirers'  credit 

ratings, we used CBonds and finmarket.ru to construct the binary variable CR Event. The key rate 

for ΔKey rate variable was downloaded from the official website of the Bank of Russia cbr.ru. 

An additional comment has to be made regarding the currency of returns calculated for CAR 

estimation. Since some of the acquirers which have an operating business in Russia (i.e. they are 

Russian companies according to the definition of (Chirkova, Chuvstvina, 2013) used above) are 

listed on international stock exchanges (e.g. NYSE, LSE), we used the respective exchange rates 

($, €, £) to recalculate the returns in order to correctly compare currency-denominated returns in 

one basis – the Russian ruble. The exchange rates and the values of Moscow stock exchange index 

(MOEX Russia) were also taken from the Investing.com. 

Finally,  after  we  have  described  the  data  preparation  procedures,  we  can  proceed  to  the 

summary of the data. Descriptive statistics of the variables are presented in the Appendix 2, Exhibit 4. 

The average value of cumulative abnormal returns across the whole sample of 201 deals (CAAR) 

is not higher than 0.5% by module for each of the three selected event windows, which indicates 

an overall lack of somewhat significant stock market reaction to an average deal in the sample. 

Precisely,  the  stock  market  reaction  is  positive  (more  closely  to  zero)  in  case  of  [–3;+3]  and  

[–10;+10] event windows, and is negative for [–5;+5] event window. This result correlates with 

the general results obtained in the previous studies of M&A, that indicate an overall absence of 

reaction  to  the  announcements  of  M&A  deals  for  acquiring  firms'  shareholders  (Chirkova, 

Chuvstvina, 2013; Bertrand, Betschinger, 2012). 

Moving on to the descriptive statistics of control variables and deals' characteristics, the 

average deal size in our sample is $595 million, which corresponds to the average level of Relative 

deal size of 7.87% (ca. 13 times lower than the average Acquirer Market cap). Out of 201 deals  

34 

 
29 were cross-border (14%) and 57 involved some form of payment other than (or in addition to) 

cash (28%). There were 24 deals where the Target company was a publicly traded enterprise (12%). 

Regarding the macroeconomic conditions (ΔKey rate), there were 50 deals which saw a tightening 

of monetary policy on the horizon of 6 months prior to the deal announcement, 106 times the key 

rate was decreased in the period of 6 months before the deal, and in 45 cases there were neither 

tightening, nor loosening of monetary policy (i.e. the key rate was left unchanged in the examined 

period). The average value of changes of key rate on the whole sample of deals equals -0.20%. 

The acquirers' financial, profitability and market valuation characteristics are the following. 

The logarithm of revenue equals 12.25 (mean value). The financial performance in terms of returns 

on assets (ROA) and equity (ROE) are 9.17% and 26.9%, respectively, for an average acquirer. 

The financial leverage measured by the book value of liabilities to market cap (D/E) is 0.84x, on 

average. And the market valuation based on the P/E multiple of acquiring company is 11.0x. 

An important set of variables are the credit rating-related measures, where we will discuss 

the data in a little more details. The median value of Credit Rating in our sample is 17, or ‘AA’ grade 

(the mean value in this case is meaningless, since CR is a certain positive integer number). The 

lowest CR in our sample is 8 (‘BB’), the highest – 19 (‘AAA’). The overall distribution of CRs in 

our sample looks like the following: 

Fig. 1. Distribution of sample by credit quality 

Source: authors' calculations 

The variable resembles the normal distribution though has a positive skewness (i.e. has a 

fatter and longer tail on the right side). As can be seen from the graph, almost 96% of our sample 

35 

05101520253035404550 
 
are companies of investment grade ratings (‘BBB+’ and above). This signifies the relative high 

credit quality of our acquirers and means that the lower-tier companies are generally left out of the 

sample. So the proposed M&A deals under inspection are also, presumably, of a high investment 

attractiveness. 

Finally,  we  will  refer  to  the  CR  Event  variable,  which  was,  as  we  mentioned  before, 

constructed  based  on  the  review  of  credit  rating  agencies'  press  releases,  each  of  which  was 

manually  readthrough  by  the  authors  to  detect  and  identify  the  justifications  of  credit  rating 

agencies' rating actions related to the deal. Our analysis yields the following data sample: 

201  
M&A deals 

There was a negative rating  
press release related to a deal  
(CR Event = 1) 

No CR Event took place as 
a result of the deal  
(CR Event = 0) 

Fig. 2. Negative rating actions after the deal announcement 

Source: authors' calculations 

As can be seen, only a tiny fraction of deals (5%, or 10 deals) resulted in a negative credit 

rating  agency  press  release  thereafter.  However,  if  they  will  be  matched  with  the  significant 

negative stock market reaction to the deal announcement, we will reach the desired result regarding 

the negative influence of probability of acquirer’s credit rating downgrade on M&A performance. 

In addition, this result corresponds to the result of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), where the authors have 

showed that only 17% of acquiring firms in the US market received a downgrade of a credit rating 

in the first year following the acquisition announcement, indicating a relatively small sample of 

deals that resulted in a negative rating action, as in our own sample. 

Additional  and  the  final  step  in  data  analysis  will  provide  clarity  on  the  composition  of 

acquirers in our  data.  The  most frequent  industries  of acquirers in  our sample are TMT (29%),  

Oil & Gas (27%), Metals & Mining (14%) (see Exhibit 5). The following are the most common  

acquirers  in  our  sample:  MTS  had  conducted  28  deals,  Lukoil  –  13  deals,  Rosneft  –  12  deals, 

VimpelCom (Beeline) – 11 deals (see Exhibit 6). Thus, the top-4 acquirers account for over 32% 

of deals and belong to the TMT or the Oil & Gas sectors. 

36 

5%95% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before we proceed to the discussion and presentation of the results, we have to confirm that 

the proposed models will adequately work on the obtained sample and can be used to interpret the 

results and make conclusions. 

A series of tests were carried out to verify the statistical properties of the models. The probit 

model’s maximum likelihood (ML) estimators are consistent if the likelihood function is correctly 

specified. The most common deviations from that, which arise in the binary choice models, are the 

heteroskedasticity and non-normality of the estimated residuals of the model. 

The White test was performed to test for the presence of heteroskedasticity in the data. The 

null  hypothesis  of  homoskedasticity  was  not  rejected  on  all  reasonable  levels  of  significance, 

indicating a homogeneous behaviour of the model’s residuals (i.e. constant variance) and thus the 

uniformity of the data. The residuals were also tested for normality using the Skewness-Kurtosis 

test similar to the Jarque–Bera test for normality. The results showed that there is no evidence to 

assume any other distribution other than normal, which means that the model’s errors behave like 

a normal distribution. The probit model thus obtains good statistical qualities and its results can be 

safely interpreted. 

In addition to the probit model, the standard regression model was also tested for conditions 

necessary  to  perform  the  regression  analysis  and  OLS  estimation.  The  heteroskedasticity  was 

rejected based on the same White test. The Breusch–Godfrey test did not confirm the presence of 

autocorrelation between the errors. The Jarque–Bera test showed the normality of residuals. 

Finally, both models were also tested for multicollinearity using the correlation matrix of 

paired correlations between the models' explanatory variables. The analysis shows that there are 

no significant correlations between the models' variables higher than 0.286 and 0.537 for the probit 

and the OLS regressions, respectively (refer to Ex. 7 and Ex. 8 in Appendix 2). This means that the 

models' exogenous variables are uncorrelated to each other and the problem of multicollinearity 

does not arise. Additionally, the absence of multicollinearity for OLS model was tested using the 

variance inflation factor (VIF) test, which showed the highest factor of 1.72 for the   (CR Event), 

𝔼 

which is well below the 2.5 level (see Exhibit 9). This confirms there is no multicollinearity. 

Concerning the endogeneity problem, we follow the argument of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), who 

states that we directly connect the trigger event  (announcement of the acquisition) with the CRA 

response (placing the rating under review), eliminating potential endogeneity concerns as the review 

process follows a chorological order. 

37 

 
 
4.2. Hypotheses testing and discussion of the results 

The first step in our empirical research is to assess the probability of acquirer’s credit rating 

change due to the M&A announcement and to evaluate the impact of M&A deals characteristics 

on the probability of such change. 

Along with the model presented in the equation (1), we have estimated two more models 

with the addition of leverage and the credit rating, indicated by the index numbers (2) and (3) in 

the following table, respectively. The Table 1 reports the results of estimation of the probit models 

using the maximum likelihood procedure. 

Tab. 1. Results of the probit models estimation (dependent variable – CR Event)  

Variables (N = 201) 

Relative deal size 

Payment method 

Cross-border 

ΔKey rate 

Public Target 

ln (Revenue) 

ROE 

D/E 

Credit Rating 

Constant 

R-squared (pseudo) 
LR-test 
Observations 

standard errors in parentheses 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 

(1) 
ℙ (Y=1) 

(2) 
ℙ (Y=1) 

(3) 
ℙ (Y=1) 

(0.572) 

(0.561) 

0.679 
(0.593) 

0.678 
(0.578) 

(0.494) 
-0.145- 
(0.185) 

0.714 
(0.593) 
***1.464***  ***1.435***  **1.465** 
(0.553) 
***1.101***  ***1.057***  **1.102** 
(0.501) 
-0.169- 
(0.194) 
***1.078***  ***1.028***  **1.078** 
(0.517) 
-0.267- 
(0.198) 
0.471 
(0.654) 
-0.0992 
(0.233) 

(0.508) 
-0.289- 
(0.197) 
0.470 
(0.625) 

(0.510) 
-0.288- 
(0.210) 
0.471 
(0.638) 

(0.509) 
-0.145- 
(0.187) 

-0.0929 
(2.184) 

0.4320 
0.0000 
201 

-0.252 
(2.175) 

0.4346 
0.0000 
201 

-0.00130 
(0.118) 
-0.0835 
(2.348) 

0.4320 
0.0000 
201 

Source: authors' calculations 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All of the models are significant at the level of 1% based on the LR-test. However, adding 

the acquirer’s leverage and its credit rating to the (1) model did not provide significant improvement, 

since the estimated coefficients of the respective variables appeared to be statistically insignificant. 

This  result  is  contradictory  to  the  result  of  (Chen,  2003)  and  (Kang,  2022),  who  showed  a 

significant negative influence of leverage on the acquirer’s CR downgrade, but is consistent with 

the results of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024) and (Chang et al., 2018), who showed that leverage does not 

have a significant impact on subsequent acquirer’s CR level. Regarding the results of adding the credit 

rating to the equation, we also received a contradictory result to the one of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), 

who showed a significant positive influence of CR on the probability of acquirer’s CR downgrade. 

To choose between the models, we have performed Akaike's information criterion (AIC) 

and Bayesian information criterion (BIC) analysis, which showed us that indeed the (1) model is 

the best, since adding the leverage and credit rating did not significantly improve the explanatory 

power of the model. So, based on the information criteria, we pick the (1) model for further analysis, 

as it has the lowest values of AIC/BIC (see Exhibit 10). 

To analyse and interpret the results of the binary choice models, where the dependent variable 

is a dummy, we need to calculate the marginal effects (i.e. partial effects),                         , 

since the direct values of coefficients are not subject to interpretation. The Table 2 reports the main 

results of the probit model estimation (for the output from STATA, see Exhibits 11-12). 

Tab. 2. Results of the probit model (1) estimation 

Variables (N = 201) 

Coefficient 

ℙ (CR Event=1) 

Relative deal size 

0.678 
(0.578) 

0.040 
(0.033) 

Payment method 

***1.464***  ***0.086*** 

(0.561) 

(0.032) 

Cross-border 

***1.101***  **0.065** 

ΔKey rate 

(0.494) 
-0.145- 
(0.185) 

(0.028) 
-0.009- 
(0.011) 

Public Target 

***1.078***  **0.063** 

ln (Revenue) 

ROE 

(0.508) 
-0.289- 
(0.197) 
0.470 
(0.625) 

(0.029) 
-0.017- 
(0.011) 
0.028 
(0.037) 

standard errors in parentheses          Source: authors' calculations 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As can be seen from the table above, we reject the H1.1 hypothesis as the Relative deal size 

variable is not significant at each of the significance levels. This result is inconsistent to the results 

of  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024;  Furfine,  Rosen,  2011),  who  showed  a  significant  positive  influence  of 

relative size on the probability of credit rating downgrade in the US market. This may be partially 

explained by the following intuition. As large deals usually require debt financing (Ryan, 2013), 

the large deals conducted on the Russian market presumably are more often financed with own 

sources, rather than debt. Therefore, the large size of the deal does not affect the CR position of the 

acquirer.  However,  there  is  no  direct  evidence  to  that,  since  the  authors  did  not  perform  the 

statistical analysis of sources of funding of deals on the Russian market. The overall conclusion is 

that the size of the deal does not have an impact on CR review in the Russian market. 

The  hypothesis  concerning  the  deal’s  payment  method  H1.2,  is  also  rejected  since  the 

Payment method is significant at 1% level, but has a positive sign, which means that paying in 

stocks on the Russian market has a significant positive influence on the probability of CR downgrade. 

This refutes with our expectations and contradicts (Chang et al., 2018; Furfine, Rosen, 2011), who 

showed a significant negative influence of this variable on the US market. Such interesting results 

on the Russian market may be subject to the following explanation. Paying in stocks is a signal to 

the market that the acquirer’s equity is overvalued, and its intrinsic (true) value is less than the 

currently observed value on the market. It means that there is an information asymmetry in the 

market and, therefore, it draws the attention of CRAs to the potential revision of a CR, since it is 

in  their  work  to  eliminate  the  information  asymmetry  and  act  as  an  intermediaries  between  the 

issuers  and  investors.  Consequently,  they  perform  a  CR  review  which  results  in  a  negative 

implication on the acquirer’s CR. Thus, we find a significant positive influence of stock payment 

method  on  the  probability  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating  downgrade  on  the  Russian  market.  This 

influence is significant at 1% level and has a marginal effect of 8.6 percentage points increase to 

the probability of a CR downgrade. 

Accordingly, the hypothesis H1.3 concerning the positive influence of cross-border nature 

of deals on acquirer’s credit rating downgrade is not rejected at the 5% significance level. This does 

not correspond to the result of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), who showed an insignificant influence of this 

variable on the US market, but coincides with our expectations. We consider that the announcement 

of a cross-border deal on Russian market is a significant and new important factor for the rating 

process, which was not considered by the rating agency prior to the public announcement of this 

information.  Thus,  a  new  factor  comes  into  play  and  CRAs  re-perform  their  assessment  of  the 
40 

 
company  in  the  face  of  new  risks.  Based  on  our  findings,  a  cross-border  deal  conducted  by  a 

Russian acquirer is a significant positive factor contributing to the probability of a CR downgrade. 

This influence is significant at 5% level and is estimated as 6.5 percentage points increase to the 

probability of a CR downgrade, based on the marginal effects. 

In addition to the variables of our interest, we observe a significant positive influence of a 

Public Target acquisition on the probability of acquirer’s credit rating downgrade. This influence 

is significant at 5% level and is estimated as 6.3 percentage points increase. This contradicts the 

results of previous studies (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Chang et al., 2018; Furfine, Rosen, 2011), where 

an insignificant relationship was found. The other controlling variables are insignificant and do not 

fall to interpretation. 

Based on the results of estimation of the probit model (1) from the Tab. 2 above and using 

the equation (3) from the previous section, we will construct the binary variable,   (CR Event) , 

𝔼 

which  will  denote  the  investors'  expectations  regarding  the  probability  of  change  of  acquirer’s 

credit rating. 

In order to do so, we constructed a ROC curve of the predicted probabilities based on the 

model’s  regression  results.  ROC  curve  indicates  all  of  the  possible  combinations  of  predicted 

outcomes by varying the sensitivity and specificity rates of the model. So, the higher the ROC curve, 

the better is the predictive power of the model. Based on our analysis, the estimated model yields 

the following prediction results (for the STATA output, see Exhibit 13):  

•  Area under curve (AUC) is equal to the 0.9555; 

•  Sensitivity (true positive rate) is equal to the 0.90; 

•  Specificity (true negative rate) is equal to the 0.93. 

This in generally is considered to be an outstanding result for the predictive power of such 

kind of models. AUC > 0.9 indicates that the model can effectively distinguish between 0’s and 

1’s. We further construct the table of frequency counts in order to illustrate the result (see Exhibit 14): 

.̂ 
ℙ (Y=1) 

0 

177 

1 

178 

1  Total 

14 

191 

10 

9 

23 

ℙ (Y=1) 

0 

1 

Total 

41 

 
 
 
 
So, based on the table above we can see that  indeed our model predicts the 9 out of 10 

Credit Rating Events, so the sensitivity (share of correctly identified 1’s) is 90%. However, there 

are also 14 cases when the model predicts 1’s when the true value is 0, i.e. investors predict that 

the M&A deal will cause a negative press release, but it doesn’t. This is consistent with the fact 

that we have identified the investors' expectations about the event, not the real ex-post variable. In 

such case, we observe the behaviour of the real market which possesses the information available 

to investors at the time of the deal announcement, and thus it falls into the timeframe of the event 

window. 

Finally, we approach the ultimate (second) step of our empirical research – determining the 

influence of acquirer’s CR characteristics on M&A performance. The variable calculated in the 

previous step along with the absolute level of acquirer’s CR will be used in the following regression. 

The Table 3 reports the main results of the regression models estimation (for the output from STATA, 

refer to Exhibits 15-17). 

Tab. 3. Results of regression models estimation (dependent variable – CAR) 

Variables (N=201) 

(1) 
CAR(–3,+3) 

(2) 

(3) 

CAR(–5,+5)  CAR(–10,+10) 

Credit Rating 

𝔼 
E (CR Event) 

Relative deal size 

Payment method 

Cross-border 

D/E 

P/E 

ROA 

Constant 

F-test 
R-squared 

-0.0031* 
(0.00157) 
-0.0244* 
(0.0138) 
*-0.0347** 
(0.0147) 
0.0115 
(0.00892) 
*-0.0257** 
(0.0106) 
**-0.0125*** 
(0.00337) 
-2.89e-05 
(0.000173) 
**-0.140*** 
(0.0482) 
0.0298 
(0.0262) 

-0.00299 
(0.00195) 
-0.0314* 
(0.0171) 
**-0.0480*** 
(0.0182) 
0.0163 
(0.0110) 
**-0.0485*** 
(0.0131) 
*-0.0106** 
(0.00416) 
1.24e-05 
(0.000214) 
**-0.198*** 
(0.0596) 
0.0206 
(0.0324) 

*-0.0062** 
(0.00266) 
-0.0423* 
(0.0233) 
**-0.0663*** 
(0.0248) 
0.0104 
(0.0151) 
*-0.0402** 
(0.0180) 
*-0.0139** 
(0.00569) 
-2.05e-05 
(0.000293) 
**-0.285*** 
(0.0814) 
0.0682 
(0.0443) 

0.0000 
0.1924 

0.0000 
0.2011 

0.0000 
0.1697 

standard errors in parentheses                                              Source: authors' calculations 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All of the models are significant at the level of 1% based on the F-test. We can also see that 

the regression coefficients are similar on different event windows both in terms of the significance 

and the behaviour of the discovered relationships (i.e. the sign of coefficients). 

Based on the  regression results, we  do not  reject  the  H2 hypothesis  at  the 5%  and 10% 

significance levels in models (3) and (1), respectively, with the exception of the model (2), where 

an  insignificant  relationship  of  acquirer’s  credit  rating  and  M&A  performance  was  found.  The 

significant negative acquirer’s credit rating influence on M&A performance was found in models 

(3) and (1). This result partially agrees with (Aktas et al., 2021) where a curvilinear relationship for 

the US market was observed, and disagrees with the results of (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Blomkvist et 

al., 2021; Hasan et al., 2021) who argued that CR level does not have a significant impact on M&A 

deals announcement returns in developed markets. However, we are the first study to conduct a 

similar research in the developing market, e.g. the Russian market. Based on our findings, we see 

that the Russian acquirers indeed follow the financial constraints and free cash flow arguments, 

since  the  credit  rating  is  found  to  be  negatively  related  to  acquirer  announcement  returns.  This 

influence is significant and becomes more pronounced as the event window widens. 

Accordingly, the hypothesis H3 is also not rejected at the 10% significance level for all of 

the studied event windows. Based on the results of models (1) – (3), the probability of acquirer’s 

credit  rating  downgrade,  measured  from  the  investors'  expectations,  has  a  significant  negative 

influence on acquirers' M&A performance on the Russian market. These results are consistent with 

the  results  of  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024),  who  also  showed  a  significant  negative  influence  of  a 

probability of acquirer’s credit rating downgrade on the deal announcement returns in the US market. 

However, in addition to (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024), we employ an ex-ante estimate of this probability to 

receive  the  Russian  investors'  expectations  about  a  certain  negative  CR  event  related  to  the 

acquisition announcement. Consequently, we find out that Russian investors in fact anticipate the 

CR downgrade risk and this risk is indeed negatively reflected in the stock returns. This influence 

is significant and it persists throughout the whole observation period, as both in the immediate and 

the longer-term stock market reaction on the Russian market. 

In  addition  to  the  CR  characteristics,  we  also  see  an  important  influence  of  the  control 

variables.  Relative  deal  size  has  a  significant  positive  contribution  to  the  M&A  announcement 

returns  during  the  observed  period  on  the  Russian  market,  which  is  consistent  with  some  prior 

studies (Aktas et al., 2021), and inconsistent with the others (Blomkvist et al., 2021). 

43 

 
The Cross-border nature of the deal is found out to be a significant negative factor for the 

M&A performance of Russian acquirers in the studied period. This result does not correspond to 

the bulk of previous authors (Kiesel, Riehl, 2024; Aktas et al., 2021; Blomkvist et al., 2021; Hasan 

et al., 2021) who found an absence of relationship between cross-border character of deal and its 

performance. 

The D/E (i.e. leverage) of the acquirer is a significant positive factor of M&A performance 

for  Russian  firms  in  the  observed  period.  This,  in  general,  agrees  with  the  previous  studies 

conducted on the US market (Blomkvist et al., 2024; Blomkvist et al., 2021; Hasan et al., 2021), 

who also saw a positive influence of leverage on the M&A performance of acquirers. 

The ROA (i.e. profitability) of Russian acquirers is also a positively related variable to the 

M&A announcement stock returns in the Russian market. Previous studies have found both the 

positive  (Kang,  2022),  the  negative  (Kiesel,  Riehl,  2024;  Hasan  et  al.,  2021),  and  the  absence 

(Blomkvist et al., 2024; Blomkvist et al., 2021) of the relationship of this variable to the M&A deals 

performance. 

44 

 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion 

There  is  an  intensive  debate  in  the  academic  literature  on  the  impact  of  M&A  deals  on 

acquirer's CR downgrade probability and on the influence of acquirer's CR on M&A performance. 

They are primarily concerned with developed capital markets. During the course of the literature 

review,  it  was  found  that  deals  characteristic,  such  as  relative  deal  size,  cross  border  deals  and 

payment  method,  have  contradictory  results  on  acquirer’s  credit  rating  downgrade  probability. 

Prior research has also obtained ambiguous results on the influence of the acquirer's credit ratings 

themselves on the M&A performance and the negative impact of acquirer's credit rating downgrade 

risk on deal associated abnormal stock return. 

In this study we employ a sample of 201 deals, conducted on the Russian market in the 

period from 2000 to 2022. The empirical research carried out on this sample yields the following 

results: 

• 

the  relative size  of  the  deal  does  not  have  a  significant impact  on  the  CR  review  in  the 

Russian market; 

• 

the payment method is a significant positive factor for the probability of acquirer’s credit 

rating downgrade on the Russian market. This influence is significant at 1% level and has 

a marginal effect of 8.6 percentage points increase to the probability of a CR downgrade; 

•  cross-border deals conducted by the Russian acquirers are significantly positively related 

to the subsequent probability of acquirer’s CR downgrade. This influence is significant at 

5%  level  and  is  estimated  as  6.5  percentage  points  increase  to  the  probability  of  a  CR 

downgrade, based on the marginal effects; 

• 

the credit rating level has a significant negative relationship with the acquirer’s M&A deals 

performance.  This  influence  is  significant  and  becomes  more  pronounced  as  the  event 

window widens; 

• 

the  Russian  investors  in  fact  anticipate  the  CR  downgrade  risk  and  this  risk  is  indeed 

negatively reflected in the stock returns. 

A key limitation of this paper is the non-in-depth analysis of the CR variable construction. 

The basic credit rating scale is collected from CRs assigned by different rating agencies without 

quantitative calculations of default risk. The best practice is to calculate default risks for each rating 

category  of  each  international  and  national  rating  agency  and  compile  a  base  scale  and 
45 

 
 
correspondence tables based on the intersection of these default risks. The second limitation of our 

study is the lack of developed model to estimate the company’s default risk. This would allow us 

to estimate the influence of M&A deal on the calculated default risk and the impact of calculated 

default  risk  on  M&A  performance.  This  would  provide  us  with  an  opportunity  to  compare  the 

results obtained for credit rating and calculated default risk and verify their robustness. 

Despite the fact that there are active discussions in the scientific community on the problem 

of relationship between CRs and M&A deals, this field is still poorly studied. The opportunities for 

future  research  include studying  the  effect  of  credit rating  on  the  overall  M&A  deal  process  in 

emerging markets: target selection process, time to deal completion, method of payment, premium 

deal size and the efficiency of the M&A deal for target, as well as the influence of M&A deal on 

the  probability  of  target’s  credit  rating  downgrade.  The  obtained  results  can  be  compared  with 

previous research findings in developed markets and corresponded with the results of our study. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
References 

ACRA. (2024). Methodology for comparing credit ratings assigned on international ACRA scale 

with credit ratings assigned on national ACRA scales. Retrieved from https://www.acra-

ratings.ru/criteria/951/ 

Adelson, M. H. (2012). The role of Credit ratings in the financial System. Global Credit Portal,  

1–12. Retrieved from https://www.maalot.co.il/publications/OAC20141120110802.pdf 

Aivazian, S., Golovan, S., Karminsky, A., Peresetsky, A. (2011). An approach to ratings mapping. 

Applied Econometrics, 23(3), 13–40. 

Aktas,  N.,  Petmezas,  D.,  Servaes,  H.,  Karampatsas,  N.  (2021).  Credit  ratings  and  acquisitions. 

Journal of Corporate Finance, 69, Article 101986. 

Amihud, Y., Lev, B. (1981). Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers. The 

Bell Journal of Economics, 12(2), 605–617. 

Avrutskaya, S., and Maricheva, E. (2021). Testing Russian Stock Market Efficiency Using Event 

Studies: Impact of Credit Ratings Changes. Journal of Corporate Finance Research, 15(2), 

42–54. 

Balcilar, M., Bathia, D., Demirer, R., Gupta, R. (2021). Credit ratings and predictability of stock 

return dynamics of the BRICS and the PIIGS: Evidence from a nonparametric causality-in-

quantiles approach. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 79, 290–302. 

Bank for International Settlements. (2014). Long-term Rating Scales Comparison. Retrieved from 

https://www.bis.org/bcbs/qis/qisrating.htm 

Bank of Russia. (2021). Decision of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Russia on the levels of 

credit ratings to be established in accordance with Regulation of the Bank of Russia No. 

781-П. Retrieved from https://cbr.ru/about_br/dir/rsd_2022-12-23_53_02/ 

Bank of Russia. (2024). Comparison of Rating Scales of Russian Credit Rating Agencies. Retrieved 

from https://cbr.ru/eng/press/pr/?file=638564029393424156ENG_INFR.htm 

Becker, B., Milbourn, T. (2011). How did increased competition affect credit ratings? Journal of 

Financial Economics, 101(3), 493–514. 

47 

 
 
Behr,  P.,  Guettler,  A.  (2008).  The  Informational  Content  of  Unsolicited  Ratings.  Journal  of 

Banking and Finance, 32, 587–599. 

Bertrand,  O.,  Betschinger.  M.  (2012).  Performance  of  domestic  and  cross-border  acquisitions: 

Empirical evidence from Russian acquirers. Journal of comparative economics, 40(3). 

Billett, M. T., King, T.-H., Mauer, D. C. (2004). Bondholder wealth effects in mergers and acquisitions: 

New evidence from the 1980s and 1990s. The Journal of Finance, 59(1), 107–135. 

Blomkvist, M., Felixson, K., Liljeblom, E., Vyas, H. (2021). The Initial and Subsequent Credit 

Rating Effects on Acquisitions. S&P Global Market Intelligence. 

Blomkvist,  M.,  Kortekangas,  J.,  Vyas,  H.  (2021).  Credit  Rating  Levels  and  Acquisitions:  The 

European Evidence. Retrieved from www.researchgate.net/publication/350877420 

Blomkvist, M., Felixson, K., Liljeblom, E., Vyas, H., Basnet, A. (2024). The acquisition motive of 

newly credit rated firms. Journal of Banking & Finance, 164, Article 107218. 

Boot,  A.,  Milbourn,  T.,  Schmeits,  A.  (2005).  Credit  Ratings  as  Coordination  Mechanisms.  The 

Review of Financial Studies, 19(1), 81–118. 

Brealey, R., Myers, S., Allen, F. (1980). Principles of Corporate Finance. McGraw-Hill/Irwin. 

Butler, A. (2008). Distance Still Matters: Evidence from Municipal Bond Underwriting. Review of 

Financial Studies, 21(2), 763–784. 

CBonds. (2024). Consistency of international rating scales of Moody's, Standard & Poor's, Fitch. 

https://data.cbonds.info/configs/Ratings/Cbonds%20methodology%20for%20credit%20ra

tings_rus.pdf 

CBonds. (2014).  Methodology  of  correspondence  of  international and national  rating  scales  for 

Russia 

of  Moody's, 

Standard  & 

Poor's, 

Fitch. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://data.cbonds.info/configs/Ratings/technique_of_relevant_international_and_russian

_national_scale_rating_agencies.pdf 

CBonds.  (2006).  S&P  Puts  Pyaterochka  and  Subsidiaries  On  Watch  (Negative)  on  Possible 

Acquisition. Retrieved from https://cbonds.com/news/337191/ 

Chang, Q., Bhabra, H. S., Bhabra, G. S. (2018). Does the quality of acquisitions inform bond rating 

revisions? Accounting and Finance, 60(1), 149–182. 

48 

 
Chen, J.-H. (2003). Association between Credit Rating Changes and High-Tech M&A in Taiwan. 

Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance and Business Ventures, 8(3), 77–95. 

Chen, W. H., & Shih, J. Y. (2006). A study of Taiwan’s issuer credit rating systems using support 

vector machines. Expert Systems with Applications 30(3), 427–435. 

Chirkova,  E.,  Chuvstvina  E.  (2013).  Short-term  Market  Reaction  on  Cross-border  Mergers  and 

Acquisitions of Russian Mining and Metal Companies. HSE Economic Journal, 17(1), 166–187. 

Chung, K. H., Frost, C. Ann., & Kim, M. (2012). Characteristics and information value of credit 

watches. Financial Management, 41(1), 119–158. 

Dawar, G., Bhatia, S., Parkash, B. (2021). Does Credit Rating Revisions Affect the Price of Common 

Stock: A Study of Indian Capital Market. Business Perspectives and Research, 11(2). 

Dyachkova,  N.  (2018).  The  comparison  of  rating  scales  of  Russian  and  foreign  agencies  for 

industrial and financial companies. Journal of Corporate Finance Research, 12(2), 153–170. 

Expert  RA.  (2025).  Mapping  the  Russian  national  and  international  rating  scales  by  theoretical 

default  probabilities.  Retrieved  from  https://raexpert.ru/about/disclosure/rating-scales-

information/ 

Expert  RA.  (2025).  Rating  scales,  rating  outlooks  and  status  "under  watch".  Retrieved  from 

https://raexpert.ru/ratings/scales 

Financial stability forum. (2009). Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market 

and 

Institutional  Resilience.  Update 

on 

Implementation.  Retrieved 

from 

https://www.fsb.org/uploads/r_0904d.pdf 

Furfine, C. H., Rosen, R. J. (2011). Mergers increase default risk. Journal of Corporate Finance, 

17(4), 832–849. 

Golovan, S., Karminsky, A., Peresetsky, A. (2011). Сопоставление рейтинговых шкал агентств 

на основе эконометрического анализа рейтингов российских банков in the book XII 

Международная  научная  конференция  по  проблемам  развития  экономики  и 

общества. HSE Publishing House. 

Grigorieva,  S.  (2020).  How  M&A  deals  influence  corporate  performance  in  developed  and 

emerging capital markets: A review of empirical results in the literature. In: Strategic deals 

in emerging capital markets. Are there efficiency gains for firms in BRIC countries? Springer. 
49 

 
Grishunin, S., and Egorova, A. (2022). Comparative Analysis of the Predictive Power of Machine 

Learning  Models  for  Forecasting  the  Credit  Ratings  of  Machine-Building  Companies. 

Journal of Corporate Finance Research, 16(1), 99–112. 

Harford,  J.,  Uysal,  V.  B.  (2014).  Bond  market  access  and  investment.  Journal  of  Financial 

Economics, 112(2), 147–163. 

Hasan, I., Huang, H., Thomas, Y. T. (2021). Are credit rating disagreements priced in the M&A 

market? Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 72. 

Healy,  P.,  Palepu,  K.,  Ruback  R.  (1992).  Does  corporate  performance  improve  after  mergers? 

Journal of Financial Economics, 31, 135–175. 

Hertikasari, A., Artha, B. (2022). Credit Ratings: A Literature Review. Journal of Business and 

Management Review, 3(6), 474–485. 

Hu, H., Kaspereit, T., Prokop, J. (2016). The information content of issuer rating changes: Evidence 

for the G7 stock markets. International Review of Financial Analysis, 47, 99–108. 

International Monetary and Financial Committee. (2008). Report of the Financial Stability Forum 

on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience.  Follow-up  on  Implementation. 

https://www.imf.org/External/AM/2008/imfc/statement/eng/fsf.pdf 

Jiang,  X.,  Packer,  F.  (2019).  Credit  ratings  of  Chinese  firms  by  domestic  and  global  agencies: 

Assessing the determinants and impact. Journal of Banking and Finance, 105, 178–193. 

Kang,  M.  (2022).  Credit  rating  downgrade  risk  and  acquisition  decisions.  Journal  of  Business 

Finance & Accounting, 49(5–6), 1011–1073. 

Karminsky, A., Dyachkova, N. (2016). The comparison of rating scales for financial institutions. 

Journal of Financial Risk Management, 4, 256–271. 

Karminsky, A., Hainsworth, R., Solodkov, V. (2013). Arm’s length method for comparing rating 

scales. Eurasian Economic Review, 3(2), 114–135. 

Kenjegaliev,  A.,  Duygun,  M.,  Mamedshakhova,  D.  (2016).  Do  rating  grades  convey  important 

information: German evidence? Economic Modelling, 53, 334–344. 

Kiesel, F., Riehl, K. (2024). Do acquirers care about credit rating consequences? Evidence from 

credit rating watches. The British Accounting Review, Article 101519. 

50 

 
KPMG, (1999). A global research report. Unlocking the shareholder value: the keys to success. 

Retrieved 

from  https://imaa-institute.org/docs/m&a/kpmg_01_Unlocking-Shareholder-

Value-The-Keys-to-Success.pdf 

Kraemer, N. W., Gunter, E. M. (2019). Credit Trends: To 'BBB', Or Not To 'BBB': Management 

Decisions  Spur  Most  U.S.  Corporate  Downgrades  To  'BBB'.  Retrieved  from  S&P: 

https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/research/articles/190905-credit-trends-to-bbb-or-

not-to-bbb-management-decisions-spur-most-u-s-corporate-downgrades-to-bbb-11115234 

Kupatadze,  E.,  Rogova,  E.  (2019).  The  Impact  of  Top-Management  Characteristics  on  the 

Performance  of  M&A  Deals  in  Russia.  In  Annual  GSOM  emerging  markets  conference 

2019, Conference book, 313–315. 

Lee,  J.  H.,  Sung,  T.,  Seo,  S.  W.  (2022).  Investor  sentiment,  credit  rating,  and  stock  returns. 

International Review of Economics & Finance, 80, 1076–1092. 

MacKinlay,  A.  C.  (1997).  Event  Studies  in  Economics  and  Finance.  Journal  of  Economic 

Literature, 35(1), 13-39. 

Ministry of Finance of Russia. (2014). Annex to the Meeting Minutes of the Expert Council on 

Rating Agencies. Retrieved from1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 

http://www.minfin.ru/common/img/uploaded/library/2012/03/Tablitsa_sootvetstviya_kred

itnye_reytingov_reytingovykh_agentstv,_akkredito%20vannykh_v_poryadke,_ustanovlen

nom_zakonodatelstvom_Rossiyskoy_Federatsii.xls 

Ng, A., Ariff, M. (2019). Does credit rating revision affect the price of a special class of common 

stock? Borsa Istanbul Review, 19(1), 44–55. 

Reddy, K.,  Bosman, R., Mirza, N. (2019). Impact of credit ratings on stock returns.  Bulletin of 

Monetary Economics and Banking, 21(3), 343–366. 

Reznichenko, E. (2022). The impact of M&A deals on the stock return of bidder companies in the 

Russian market. Internauka, 43(266), 23–34. 

Rogova, E., Novichkov, D. (2020). Analysis of stock market reaction to the change in the key rate 

of the Bank of Russia for companies in various industries. Finance and Business, 16(2), 65–79. 

Ryan,  V.  (2013).  Strategic  Acquirers  Jeopardize  Credit  Ratings.  Retrieved  from  CFO.com: 

https://www.cfo.com/news/strategic-acquirers-jeopardize-credit-ratings/665878/ 

51 

 
Ryu, D., Kim, K., Yang, H. (2019). The Impact of Credit Rating Change on Investor Sentiment. 

Journal of Derivatives and Quantitative Studies, 27(1), 85–111. 

Salvador,  C.  (2017).  Effect  of  signals  of  bank  ratings  on  stock  returns  before  and  during  the 

financial crisis. The Spanish Review of Financial Economics, 15(1), 1–11. 

Skvortsova,  I.,  Proskurin,  S.,  Kryhtin,  V.,  Ignatiev,  E.,  Stelmakhova,  E.  (2013).  Event  study 

methodology in M&A research: Evidence from developed and emerging capital markets. 

Journal of Corporate Finance Research, 4(28), 125–139. 

Skvortsova, I., Vershinina, A. (2021). Do Cognitive Biases Impact M&A Performance in Emerging 

Markets? Evidence from Russian Firms. Series WP BRP "Basic research program". No. 

82/FE/2021. 

S&P’s Rating Services. (2014). All you need to know about credit ratings, McGraw Hill Financial: 

https://www.hse.ru/data/2020/04/01/1552462758/S&P%20кредитные%20рейтинги%20

КНИГА.pdf 

S&P. (2017). General Criteria: S&P Global Ratings' National And Regional Scale Mapping Tables. 

https://disclosure.spglobal.com/ratings/en/regulatory/article/-/view/sourceId/10194514 

S&P.  (2018).  General  Criteria:  Methodology  For  National  And  Regional  Scale  Credit  Ratings. 

https://disclosure.spglobal.com/ratings/en/regulatory/article/-/view/sourceId/10575669 

Titan,  A.  G.  (2015).  The  Efficient  Market  Hypothesis:  Review  of  specialized  literature  and 

empirical research. Procedia Economics and Finance, 32, 442–449. 

Xin, L., Weijia, D., Fang, F. (2015). The Asymmetric Effects of Official Interest Rate Changes on 

China’s Stock Market During Different Market Regimes. Emerging Markets Finance and 

Trade, 51(4), 826–841. 

Yu,  F.  (2005).  Accounting  Transparency  and  the  Term  Structure  of  Credit  Spreads.  Journal  of 

Financial Economics, 75, 53–84. 

Zagudalova,  E.,  Grigorieva,  S.,  Zueva,  S.  (2024).  Does  the  education  and  experience  of  CEO 

matter?  Evidence  from  M&As  initiated  by  the  Russian  companies.  Journal  of  the  New 

Economic Association, 3(64), 103–127. 

52 

 
 
Appendix 1 

Table 1. Systematization of existing research: Influence of M&A deal characteristics on the probability of the acquirer's CR downgrade 

Article 

Kiesel, 
Riehl 
(2024) 

Chang 
et al. 
(2018) 

Chen 
(2003) 

Furfine, 
Rosen 
(2011) 

Kang 
(2022) 

# of 
observations, 
period 

5 351 domestic 
and cross-border 
M&A deals in 
1990-2021 

1 643 M&A 
deals in the 
period  
1985-2013 

101 Hi-tech and 
non-Hi-tech 
M&A deals in 
1996-2001 

1 194 M&A 
deals in the 
period  
1994-2006 

7 414 M&A 
deals in the 
period  
1986-2016 

Data 

Geography 

CRA 

USA 

S&P  

USA 

Moody’s 

Taiwan 

S&P and 
Moody’s 

Dependent variable 

1 if CR after one year is 
lower than one day prior to 
the M&A announcement 
0 - otherwise 

1 if CR after 3 or 5 years is 
upgraded compared to one 
day prior to the M&A 
announcement 
0 if CR is downgraded 

The CR index: 
0 = B or below, 1 = BB,  
2 = BBB, 3 = A, 
4 = AA, and 5 = AAA 

USA 

Calculated 
CR based 
on 
Expected 
Default 
Frequency 

ΔRating is the change in 
the acquirer’s CR from the 
end of the month prior to 
the merger announcement 
to the end of the 6 months 
after the merger completion 

USA 

S&P 

3-year CR change: equals 
the difference in the CR 
notches b/w the deal year 
and subsequent 3 years 

“+” – positive significant influence 
“ - ” – negative significant influence 

“ 0 ” – insignificant influence  
“n/a” – not analysed in the paper 

Deal-related variables 

Target-
related 
variable 

Acquirer-related variables 

Relative 
deal size 

Cross-
border 

Payment 
method 1 

CAR 2  Relatedness 3 

Acquisition 
dummy 

Public 
target 

CR 

Size 4 

Leverage 5  Profitability 6 

+ 

0 

0 

n/a 

- 

n/a 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

n/a 

0 

+ 

0 

n/a 

0 

n/a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

- 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

- 

+ 

+ 

n/a 

- 

n/a 

0 

n/a 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

+ 

- 

0 

1 Payment method is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the acquisition is financed at least partially with stock, 0 for deals where the method of payment is  
2 CAR is the cumulative abnormal return for the acquiring firm’s stock as a result of the deal announcement 
3 Relatedness is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if both an acquirer and target belong to the same industry, 0 – otherwise 
4 Size is measured as natural logarithm of the acquirer’s revenue or total assets 
5 Leverage is measured as total debt divided by equity or total debt divided by total assets 
6 Profitability is identified as ROA or ROE 

100% cash 

53 

Source: authors' analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Systematization of existing research: Summary of research results on the influence of 
M&A deals on acquirer’s stock returns in the Russian market 

Article 

# of 
observations 

Period 

Acquirer’s CAR 

Influence 

Zagudalova et 
al. (2024) 

172 

2000-2021 

Reznichenko E. 
(2022) 

53 

2010-2019 

CAR(–1,+1) = +0.32%*** 

CAR(–10,+10) = +0.01%*** 

CAR(–15,+15) = –0.09%*** 

CAR(–20,+20) = –0.13%** 

Positive influence for bidder at 
event windows (–1,+1),  
(–10, +10) 

Negative influence for bidder at 
event windows (–15,+15),   
(–20, +20) 

CAR(–1,+1) = +0.67% 

CAR(–2,+2) = +2.19%** 

CAR(–5,+5) = +2.36%** 

CAR(–10,+10) = +1.31% 

Positive influence for bidder 

Skvortsova, 
Vershinina  
(2021) 

Kupatadze, 
Rogova 
(2019) 

237 

2005-2019  CAR(–5,+5) = –0.30%*** 

Negative influence for bidder 

CAR(–1,+1) = +0.35% 

205 

2008-2018 

CAR(–5,+5) = +0.38%** 

Positive influence for bidder 

CAR(–10,+10) = +0.81% 

Chirkova E., 
Chuvstvina E. 
(2013) 

56 

2005-2011 

CAR(–2,+2) = –0.85% 

CAR(–14,+2) = –1.66% 

Bertrand, 
Betschinger 
(2012) 

295 

1999-2008 

CAR(–1,+1) = +1.1% 

CAR(–2,+2) = +1.4% 

* mark significance at 10% level 
** mark significance at 5% level 
*** mark significance at 1% level 

Insignificant influence for all 
event windows. 

M&A deals do not create or 
destroy acquirer’s shareholders 
value 

Insignificant influence for all 
event windows. 

M&A deals do not create or 
destroy acquirer’s shareholders 
value 

Source: authors' analysis 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Systematization of existing research: Influence of the acquirer's CR characteristics on M&A deal performance 

Data 

CR characteristics 

Assigned CR 

Direct and indirect indicators of CR downgrade risk 

Deal-related variables 

Target-
related 
variable 

Acquirer-related variables 

Geography 

CRA 

CR  
level 

CR 
dummy 

Initial 
CR 7 

Pr (CR 
Downgrade) 

Review for 
downgrade 

Split  
 CR 8 

Negative 
sign 

Relative 
deal size 9 

Cross-
border 

Cash  
  deal 10 

Public 
target 

Leverage 11  Profitability 12 

# of observations, 
period 

5 351 M&A deals 
over the period 
1991-2021 

6 331 M&A deals 
over the period  
1989-2018 

7 414 M&A deals 
over the period 
1986-2016 

6 957 M&A deals 
over the period 
1980-2021 

10 598 M&A 
deals over the 
period 1990-2016 

2 959 M&A deals 
over the period 
2000-2017 

4 929 M&A deals 
over the period 
1996-2015 

Article 

Kiesel, 
Riehl 
(2024) 

Aktas  
et al. 
(2021) 

Kang 
(2022) 

Blomkvist 
et al. 
(2024) 

Blomkvist 
et. al. 
(2021) 

Blomkvist 
et al. 
(2021) 

Hasan  
et al. 
(2021) 

Harford, 
Uysal 
(2014) 

USA 

S&P 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

- 

0 

n/a 

0 

USA 

S&P 

  -/+13 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

0 

+ 

0 

0 

USA 

S&P 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

USA 

S&P 

n/a 

n/a 

USA 

S&P 

n/a 

n/a 

+ 

+ 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

Europe 

S&P 

USA 

S&P, 
Moody’s 

All 
available 
CRAs 

10 880 M&A deals 
over the period 
1990-2011 

Not 
indicated 

0 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

- 

n/a 

n/a 

- 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

“+” – positive significant influence 
“ - ” – negative significant influence 

“ 0 ” – insignificant influence  
“n/a” – not analysed in the paper 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

0 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

n/a 

- 

- 

0 

- 

- 

n/a 

n/a 

0 

+ 

+ 

+ 

0 

0 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

+ 

- 

- 

n/a 

n/a 

Source: authors' analysis 

0 

0 

- 

0 

+ 

- 

0 

0 

0 

n/a 

7 Initial Rating is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the first year in the sample a company obtains CR, 0 – otherwise 
8 Split CR is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if CRs assigned by several CRAs differ, 0 – otherwise 
9 Relative deal size is measured as either deal value divided by an acquirer’s market capitalization, or as deal value divided by an acquirer’s total assets 
10 Cash deal is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the acquisition refers to 100% cash financed acquisitions, 0 – otherwise 
11 Leverage is measured as total debt divided by total assets 
12 Profitability is identified as ROA or EBITDA divided by total assets  
13 Curvilinear relationship: negative influence of CR on M&A performance for the low rating range, positive influence for the high rating range 

55 

 
 
 
Appendix 2 

Exhibit 1. Examples of negative press releases made by rating agencies, concerning the 

acquirers' credit ratings in connection with a certain M&A deal 

Source: CBonds, S&P, Moody’s 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 2. The Base scale. Rating-to-number conversion table 

Credit Rating 

Numerical scale 

AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA– 
A+ 
A 
A– 
BBB+ 
BBB 

19 
18 
17 
16 
15 
14 
13 
12 
11 

  continued… 
  BBB– 
  BB+ 
  BB 
  BB– 
  B+ 
  B 
  B– 
  CCC+ 
  CCC 
  CCC– 

  10 
  9 
  8 
  7 
  6 
  5 
  4 
  3 
  2 
  1 

Source: own estimate 

Exhibit 3. Correspondence table between international and national rating scales  

(Russia) of international rating agencies (2014) 

Source: CBonds, Bank for International Settlements data 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 4. Descriptive statistics of variables 

Variables 

CAR(–10,+10) 
CAR(–5,+5) 
CAR(–3,+3) 

Credit Rating 
CR Event 
𝔼 
E (CR Event) 

Relative deal size 
Payment method 
Cross-border 
ΔKey rate 
Public Target 
ln (Revenue) 
D/E 
P/E 
ROA 
ROE 

(1) 
N 

201 
201 
201 

201 
201 
201 

201 
201 
201 
201 
201 
201 
201 
201 
201 
201 

(2) 
Mean 

0.09% 
-0.36%- 
0.15% 

16.44 
0.050 
0.114 

7.87% 
0.284 
0.144 
-0.20% 
0.119 
12.25 
0.84x 
11.0x 
9.17% 
26.9% 

(3) 
Median 

0.18% 
-0.38%- 
-0.06%- 

17 
0 
0 

1.01% 
0 
0 
-0.25% 
0 
12.34 
0.48x 
9.08x 
8.83% 
19.0% 

(4) 
SD 

8.63% 
6.43% 
5.18% 

2.181 
0.218 
0.319 

24.5% 
0.452 
0.352 
1.95% 
0.325 
1.628 
1.09x 
19.8x 
7.71% 
52.5% 

(5) 
Min 

-20.7% 
-20.1% 
-13.1% 

8 
0 
0 

0.00% 
0 
0 
-9.50% 
0 
8.514 
8-0.00x 
-100.0x 
-27.1% 
-96.5% 

(6) 
Max 

44.3% 
39.3% 
28.0% 

19 
1 
1 

239.4% 
1 
1 
10.25% 
1 
15.96 
89.1x 
45.0x 
40.9% 
429.2% 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 5. Acquirers' industries 

201  
M&A deals 

TMT 

Oil & Gas 

Metals & Mining 

Retail 

Food and Beverage 

Power generation 

Other 

Source: authors' calculations 

58 

29%27%14%8%7%5%10% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 6. The most frequent acquiring companies in the sample 

Acquirer 

Number of deals 

 1.  MTS 
 2.  Lukoil 
 3.  Rosneft 
 4.  VimpelCom 
 5.  Gazprom 
 6.  Cherkizovo 
 7.  Rostelecom 
 8.  Polymetal 
 9.  Golden Telecom 
10.  X5 Retail 
11.  Novatek 
12.  Tatneft 
13.  Evraz 
 Total 

28 
13 
12 
11 
8 
8 
8 
8 
7 
7 
6 
6 
5 
127 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 7. Matrix of paired correlations for probit model variables 

  Variables 
 (1) Relative deal  
(1) 
 (1) size 
 (2) Payment  
(2) 
 (2) method  
 (3) Cross-border 

 (4) ΔKey rate 

 (5) Public Target 

 (6) ln (Revenue) 

 (7) ROE 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

-1.000*** 

-0.130*** -1.000*** 

-0.028*** -0.087*** -1.000*** 
-0.028*** -0.190*** -0.070*** -1.000*** 
-0.187*** -0.143*** -0.286*** -0.052*** -1.000*** 
-0.185*** -0.163*** -0.083*** -0.116*** -0.122*** -1.000*** 
-0.195*** -0.105*** -0.021*** -0.265*** -0.067*** -0.139*** -1.000*** 

  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 

Source: authors' calculations 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 8. Matrix of paired correlations for OLS regression model variables 

𝔼 

  Variables 
 (1) Credit Rating 
 (2) E (CR Event) 
 (3) Relative deal  
(3) 
 (3) size 
 (4) Payment  
(4) 
 (4) method 
 (5) Cross-border 

 (6) D/E 

 (7) P/E 

 (8) ROA 

(2) 

(1) 
-1.000*** 
-0.001*** -1.000*** 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

-0.133*** -0.219*** -1.000*** 

-0.027*** -0.537*** -0.130*** -1.000*** 

-0.099*** -0.342*** -0.028*** -0.087*** -1.000*** 
-0.026*** -0.098*** -0.192*** -0.043*** -0.183*** -1.000*** 
-0.058*** -0.117*** -0.066*** -0.074*** -0.040*** -0.152*** -1.000*** 
-0.156*** -0.019*** -0.231*** -0.078*** -0.240*** -0.318*** -0.087*** -1.000*** 

  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 9. VIF factors for regressors (OLS regression) 

 E (CR Event) 

 Payment method 

 Cross-border 

 ROA 

 D/E 

 Relative deal size 

 P/E 

 Credit Rating 

 Mean VIF 

  VIF 
1.72 

  1/VIF 
0.581 

0.694 

0.803 

0.815 

0.833 

0.866 

0.954 

0.956 

1.44 

1.25 

1.23 

1.20 

1.15 

1.05 

1.05 

1.26 

Source: authors' calculations 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 10. AIC and BIC calculation (probit model) 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 11. Results of the estimation of probit model from STATA 

Source: authors' calculations 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 12. Marginal effects estimation using STATA 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 13. ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristics) curve 

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
S

14 
15 

Source: authors' calculations 

14 Sensitivity (true positive rate) – proportion of true positive predictions to the sum of true positive and false negative 
15 Specificity (true negative rate) – proportion of true negative predictions to the sum of true negative and false positive 
62 

0.000.250.500.751.00Sensitivity0.000.250.500.751.001 - SpecificityArea under ROC curve = 0.9555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 14. Tabulation output (STATA) 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 15. Results of the estimation of OLS model (dependent variable – CAR(–3,+3) ) 

Source: authors' calculations 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 16. Results of the estimation of OLS model (dependent variable – CAR(–5,+5) ) 

Source: authors' calculations 

Exhibit 17. Results of the estimation of OLS model (dependent variable – CAR(–10,+10) ) 

Source: authors' calculations 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
