The Government of Russian Federation 

 State Budgetary Higher Education Unit  

National Research University 

«Higher School of Economics»  

Faculty of World Economy and World Politics 

«International Program 'International Relations and Global Studies'» 

Graduation thesis 

On the topic: 

«Transformation of Discourse of the Chinese Communist Party Representatives on Arctic 

Region: from 2013 to 2024» 

By the student of the fourth year, 

group 211  

Nazmeeva Iaroslavna 

Academic supervisor:  

Varpahovskis Eriks 

Moscow, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Table of contents  

Abstract  

Introduction 

Relevance 

Literature review 

Research structure 

5 

6 

6 

8 

15 

Chapter 1 Methodological, theoretical and historical framework 

16 

of the study 

1.1. Methodology 

1.1.2. Potential shortcomings, limitations and expected outcomes 

1.2. Theoretical framework 

16 

18 

19 

1.3.  Historical  context  of  the  Chinese  involvement  in  Arctic 

21 

affairs 

1.4. Relations between China and Arctic states 

1.4.1. US-China relations in the Arctic region 

1.4.2. Russia-China relations in the Arctic region 

1.4.3. China-Finland relations on the Arctic region 

1.4.4. Sino-Danish relations in the Arctic 

1.4.5. Sino-Icelandic relations in the Arctic 

1.4.6. Sino-Swedish relations in the Arctic 

1.4.7. Sino-Norwegian relations in the Arctic   

1.4.8. China-Canada relations in the Arctic  

1.5. Chapter conclusion 

25 

25 

26 

28 

29 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

Chapter  2  The  Chinese  discourse  on  Arctic  affairs  within  the 

36 

period of 2013-2017 

          Introduction 

36 

          2.1. Compliance with previous direction of the discourse of CCP 

36 

representatives on Arctic affairs 

         2.1.1.  China  as  a  good  party  to  international  treaties  and 

37 

organizations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

         2.1.2.  China  as  a  supporter  of  preserving  the  sovereignty  and 

38 

interests of Arctic states 

         2.1.3. China as a Near-Arctic state 

39 

         2.2. Discourse on Arctic affairs after the start of presidency of Xi 

40 

Jinping 

         2.2.1. China as a responsible great power (“负责任大国”) 

         2.2.2. China as an Arctic stakeholder 

43 

45 

         2.2.3.  Respect, 

collaboration 

and  win-win 

cooperation 

45 

(“尊重、合作与共赢”） 

         2.2.4. Chinese cooperation within the Arctic region 

         2.3. Community of Common Destiny for Mankind 

         2.4. Environmental protection and climate change 

         2.5. Chapter conclusion 

47 

48 

50 

51 

         Chapter  3  The  Chinese  discourse  on  Arctic  affairs  within  the 

53 

period of 2018-2024 

         Introduction 

53 

         3.1.  Compliance  with  direction  of  the  discourse  of  CCP 

53 

representatives on Arctic affairs before 2013 

         3.1.1.    China  as  a  good  party  to  international  treaties  and 

53 

organizations 

         3.1.2.  China  as  a  supporter  of  preserving  the  sovereignty  and 

54 

interests of Arctic states 

         3.1.3. China as a Near-Arctic state 

         3.2. Chinese White Paper on the Arctic 

         3.3. The Belt and Road initiative 

         3.3.1. China-Russia cooperation 

         3.3.2. Polar Silk Road 

         3.4. Perception of Arctic policies by president Xi administration 

55 

55 

57 

58 

59 

60 

         3.4.1.  Principles  of  ‘not  to  go  overboard  and  not  to  be  63 

absent’(‘不越位、不缺位’) 

4 

         3.4.2. Chinese position on Arctic governance 

         3.5. The issue of securitization within Arctic discourse 

         3.6. Chapter conclusion 

         Conclusion 

         Limitations of the study 

         Prospects for further research 

         Reference list 

65 

66 

67 

69 

72 

72 

74 

 
 
 
Abstract 

5 

The role of People’s Republic of China (PRC) in Arctic affairs is an 

important part of the discourse of Chinese Communist Party (CCP) representatives. 

This study is based on the theory of constructivism which allows to analyze 

Chinese identity in the Arctic and its ambitions in the region, focusing on the 

period of 2013-2024. This work studies continuity and change in the Arctic 

discourse of the CCP representatives using discourse analysis and policy analysis 

to provide a comprehensive view on Chinese Arctic policies and discourse within 

the given period. This study identifies main directions of Chinese discourse on the 

Arctics and analyses their transformation within the official discourse, as well as 

studies whether previously existing features of CCP representatives’ discourse on 

Arctic affairs remained and transformed during the period of 2013-2024. 

Keywords: China, Arctic region, diplomatic rhetoric, discourse analysis, 

Belt and Road Initiative, Community of Common Destiny for Mankind. 

 
 
6 

Introduction  

Relevance 

The discourse of China on Arctic affairs and its behavior in the international 

system  is  relevant  due  to  the  increasing  power  of  China  and  its  ambitions  to 

increase its influence and the level of participation in international issues. As the 

PRC is still developing at a rapid pace, there is a necessity for China to be actively 

engaged  in  the  decision-making  process  within  the  Arctic  region.  Through 

participation in Arctic affairs China becomes able to pursue its interests in different 

dimensions,  such  as  the  interest  to  increase  its  reputation  by  obtaining  the  legal 

status to conduct its policies in the region in order to get international recognition 

of being an Arctic player. According to Kobzeva (2017)the economic interests are 

also important for  China as the Arctic provides it with the opportunity to use the 

Northern  Sea  Route  to  ensure  the  safety  and  quick  navigation  for  its  freight 

transportation.  Moreover,  Chinese  companies  actively  participate  in  projects  of 

Arctic  states,  cooperating  with  local  enterprises  providing  investments  and 

improving 

infrastructure 

to  ameliorate  resource  extraction  and  scientific 

development.  Another  important  point  is  the  political  dimension  of  Chinese 

involvement  in  the  Arctic  region,  as  China  elaborates  a  strategy  of  cooperation 

with Arctic states to increase its presence as well as to affect the position of other 

states.  As  Zuenko  (2024)  states,  together  with  Russia  China  aims  to  prevent  the 

United  States  from  strengthening in the  region, which would benefit the  Chinese 

position not only in the Arctic but also on the international arena.   

Moreover,  China  is  a  participant  of  organisations  and  forums  dedicated  to 

the topic of the Arctic. Thus, China is an observer in the Arctic council, a member 

of  the  International  Arctic  Science  Committee.  Also,  China  holds  trilateral 

dialogue on the Arctic together with Japan and South Korea in order to get support 

and  strengthen  its  positions  in  the  Arctic.  Therefore,  China  aims  to  gradually 

increase its presence and power in decision-making in Arctics in order to obtain its 

goals within and outside the region. 

7 

To  analyze  the  process  of  discourse  transformation  on  the  Arctic  within 

Chinese  officials,  this  work  considers  statements,  speeches  and  interviews  of 

Chinese policymakers published by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, the 

government of China and Xinhua News agency. The timeframe of the research is 

from 2013 to 2024 which is chosen to evaluate the cooperation of China with third 

states  on  Arctic  affairs  in  recent  years  as  well  to  trace  the  continuity  of  Arctic 

policies  of  since  the  beginning  Xi  Jinping  presidency,  which  lead  to  increased 

participation in Arctic affairs due to the promotion of BRI Initiative as well as due 

to the increased pace of Chinese economic development to the implementation of 

policies written in white paper on Arctic policy of China in 2018.   

The  goal  of  the  research  is  to  trace  the  change  and  continuity  of  Chinese 

discourse on Arctic issues.  

The tasks of the research are:  

1)  To  study  the  historical  context  of  Chinese  involvement in Arctic  affairs 

before the given framework of 2013.  

2) To analyze dimensions of Chinese interest in Arctics.  

3) To identify main factors, which shape Chinese discourse on policies in the 

Arctic region within 2013-2024.  

The  object  of  the  research  is  the  discourse  within  the  representatives  of 

Chinese  Communist  Party  during  2013-2024.  The  subject  of  the  research  is  the 

transformation of the discourse within a given period. 

 
 
Literature review   

8 

The issue of Chinese involvement in Arctic affairs and the role of Chinese 

policymakers in shaping direction of Chinese policies in the Arctic region were 

studied in various manners.  

Thus, Western scholars put main emphasis on the security dimension of 

Chinese involvement in the Arctic. According to Lackenbauer & Manicom (2013) 

and Kienko (2019), Western analysts perceive Chinese Arctic policies as a threat to 

the existing order in the region, where China together with other non-Arctic states 

claims that the Arctic region is a common area, where all representatives of 

international community have shared interests, thus, Arctic states could not 

conduct global Arctic policies independently from international community. 

However, Lackenbauer & Manicom (2013) claim that nowadays the PRC does not 

pursue aggressive policy in the Arctic and does not aim to violate international 

law.  

Vylegzhanin & Kienko (2021) also claim that there is no ground to consider 

Chinese participation in the Arctic as a threat to the existing order as China does 

not aim to increase its military presence in the region and does not make attempts 

to split the Arctic Council. Nevertheless, the analysis of speeches of Chinese 

policymakers provided in the article supports the idea that China is not content 

with the role of Ilulissat declaration of 2008 which promotes the vision of Arctic 

states towards further policy-making. Thus, in 2018 China started to hold a 

trilateral dialogue with Japan and South Korea on Arctic affairs to coordinate their 

efforts by signing treaties and making financial contributions to the research and 

environmental projects within the dialogue. Kobzeva (2017) pointed out that all 3 

states are observers in the Arctic Council, which have rights to participate in 

working groups of the Arctic council. Hence, China aims to broaden the scope of 

possible partners in the region and attract a larger number of non-Arctic states to a 

greater level of involvement in regional affairs. Moreover, Suslov & Kashin (2022) 

highlighted that the increasing presence of China in the Arctic region is the result 

of the growing influence of China in the international system, which shapes the 

9 

necessity for the PRC to be present in the region, whereas for China, its presence 

in other regions such as the Middle East or Africa could be of greater importance.  

There is also a discourse on the consistency of Chinese policies in the Arctic. 

Kienko (2019) claims that modern Chinese legal policies are in line with the basis 

of Chinese strategy of “peaceful rise”, which was proclaimed in 2012 and aimed to 

turn China into a great maritime state. 

Galimullin et. al (2024) also states that after president Xi came to power, 

China started to conduct consistent Arctic policy, aimed to make China more 

involved in Arctic affairs, such as securitization of climate protection discourse. 

Authors also highlight that these policies are aligned with Chinese strategy of the 

usage of discourse in transformation of the international system.  

The role of white paper on the Arctic, which was published by the Chinese 

government in 2018 was also discussed within the topic. According to Kuang & 

Ou (2019), the white paper provided guidelines for 5 major direction of Chinese 

Arctic policies, which implied non-stop research of Arctic region; environmental 

protection and monitoring; resource extraction on a basis of international law, 

which implied creation of Ice silk road, which would allow China to be actively 

engaged in environmental affairs as well as to promote Arctic tourism. Another 

direction denotes active participation in Arctic governance, where the Chinese 

government controls all the actions taken by Chinese individuals and entrepreneurs 

and takes part in international decision-making as well. The last direction 

proclaimed by the authors is promotion of peace and stability in the region which 

is required for its development.  

In Chinese discourse exist several works on the emergence and rising 

popularity of Chinese studies of policies made by the PRC government on Arctic 

affairs.  According to Xu & Wang (2021) there exist 3 ways of Chinese studies. 

The first wave started in 2007 after Russian scientists put the Russian flag on the 

seabed beneath the North Pole. The Chinese media extensively covered the event, 

and thus, Chinese academics started writing about the sovereignty of Arctic Ocean, 

the role of international law in the Arctic, geopolitical rivalry and international 

10 

cooperation. The second wave which lasted from 2013 to 2017 China focused on 

implementing policies, which would increase the level of legitimacy of Chinese 

actions in the Arctic.  The third wave is characterized by the publication of White 

paper on the Arctic, and researchers were concerned about its role and further 

development. Moreover, the authors mentioned that there is a common drawback 

of modern studies of China in the Arctic region, which is the lack of theoretical 

base for the research, especially highlighting the lack of studies in constructivist 

framework.  

Still, other authors have different approaches towards classification of 

Chinese Arctic studies. Thus, Wang (2017) outlined 3 stages of Chinese 

humanitarian research on Arctic affairs, where the initial stage lasted from 2007 to 

2009 and characterized the early stage, the initial stage lasted from 2010 to 2012 

and the stage of development from 2013 to 2016.   

In addition, Xu & Wang (2021) highlighted that in the academic discourse 

there exist only two directions of studies of Chinese policies within the Arctic 

region. Thus, some scholars aimed to analyze the strategy and possible influence of 

Chinese Arctic policies based on Chinese scientific and political discourse, 

whereas other scholars studied Chinese potential to assess the possibility of 

cooperation between China and other states.  

Li & Li (2020) elaborated another division of stages of Chinese research on 

Arctic issues. Thus, the first stage, during which Chinese scientists started to 

engage in Arctic discourse and accumulate Chinese materials on the issue, 

happened from 2004 to 2007. The second stage, which lasted from 2008 to 2011 

marked the creation of initial approaches towards Arctic studies, which were 

mostly dedicated to the role of geopolitics in contemporary international relations 

or natural sciences. During the third stage of 2012-2015 the number of researchers 

largely increased and became more concentrated on political affairs. The fourth 

and final stage provided by the authors lasted from 2016 to 2019 determined the 

start of the transition towards active involvement in international scientific 

discourse on the Arctic.  

11 

Another important discourse concerns the level of cooperation between 

Russia and China in the Arctic region. Many scholars suggest that both states aim 

to increase their profit by cooperating with each other. Strelnikova et.al (2024) 

implied that due to the isolated position of Russia within the Arctic Council, 

nowadays Russia aimed to increase the level of cooperation with friendly Non-

Arctic states in order to proceed with the development of its Arctic territories. 

Moreover, according to Strelnikova et.al (2024) the research area is the least 

problematic and most favourable area of cooperation between two states. Hence, 

further development of Sino-Russian relations is an important part of Chinese 

discourse on the Arctic affairs. What is more, Yakovenko (2023) states that, Russia 

is interested in diversification of its relations with Asian states, which implies that 

Chinese presence in Arctic is not a threat, but an opportunity for mutual 

cooperation, not only with China but also with non-Western states, which could be 

involved in the process of cooperation. However, Galimullin et. al (2024) wrote 

that although Russia is considered as a traditional partner of China in the Arctic, 

since February 2022, when the deterioration of relations between Russia and 

Western states happened, China has to balance between two sides, due to the idea 

that Western states could start cooperating against China as well. Therefore, for 

China it is essential to maintain the existing regional system, due to the fact that 

China has already elaborated strategies of conducting policies within this system.  

The issue of Sino-American relations in the Arctic is also widely discussed 

among scholars. Due to the increasing level of tension between the PRC and the 

US, the Arctic is considered as a region where both sides strive for increased 

influence. According to Xie & Xia (2020), China perceives the Arctic as a 

common region, whereas the US aims to militarize the Arctic region. Despite US 

claims that they provide more military equipment to the region to contain Russia 

and China, authors claim that the US aims to increase its military presence in the 

Arctic in order to incorporate NATO and its member states into the Arctic dialogue 

to gain more support in Arctic affairs.  

12 

Zabella (2019) also noted that promotion of ecological policies in the Arctic 

region helps China to strengthen its position on climate change by taking the place 

of the US which in 2017 during the Trump presidency withdrew from the Paris 

Agreement. Thus, China becomes able to gain more influence and support in the 

region at the expense of the USA,  

The fact that the Arctic region becomes more securitized due to increasing 

competition between the US, China and Russia also influences further 

development of the region. As Kopra (2022) stated, the traditional issues of 

security become more important within the region, due to the clash between Russia 

and China and growing tension between US and China.  Thus, in order to change 

the balance of power, China has to increase its presence and adopt new Arctic 

policies.  

However, Xu & Wang (2021) claimed that it is the US who creates the 

narrative on competition between great powers and strategic competition in the 

Arctic region, as the Trump administration conducts policies aimed to return great 

power competition to the top of the dominant security paradigm. Thus, China only 

reacts to the behavior of China, but itself does not have imperialistic ambitions.  

The influence of the Ukraine crisis on Arctic affairs is also a part of 

discourse. According to Yue & Gu (2024) after the beginning of the Ukraine crisis 

in 2022 the leading role in Arctic affairs is played by the issue of balance between 

military, security, diplomacy and alliances between states. Moreover, there is a 

growing interest in economic and technological development of the region, which 

makes the Arctic more attractive to the international arena. Thus, Yue & Gu (2024) 

provide a list of recommendations for further Arctic policies of China, which 

implies that China should not take any sides, as China must remain neutral and 

develop the Ice silk road on the basis that the Arctic is open for everyone. What is 

more, relations with Russia should be developing cautiously and softly in order to 

achieve stable relations with Nordic countries as well, as relations with Nordic 

countries are essential to challenge the American strategy of worsening the image 

of China in the region. Moreover, authors perceive the EU as an important player 

in the region which could coordinate and balance the relations between the US and 

13 

China.  

The issue of Chinese attitude towards the Arctic is also widely popular 

among both Western and non-Western scholars. Karlusov (2012) stated that 

Chinese researchers claim that the Arctic region should become more 

internationalized and should be governed by the principles of international law, 

which implies the equality between Arctic states, which have special rights and 

other states, which as China hold expeditions in the region.  

Chircop (2011) noted that political interests of China in the region are driven 

by economic ones, such as maritime trade, resource extraction and access to the 

energy resources. Still, to be engaged in the Arctic affairs China uses its scientific 

research as a way to communicate with Arctic states, showing Chinese potential. 

Moreover, China also aims to gain support from developing states, as it constantly 

refers to the international law as the main source to regulate the region, claiming 

that the Arctic is international and any state has rights to participate in decision-

making.  

Li (2015) studied the prospects of Chinese participation in resource 

extraction in the Arctic. According to his view, the Chinese government has to 

focus on the elaboration of the strategy of Arctic resource usage simultaneously 

with the continuation of strengthening cooperation with state exporters of energy 

resources. The author noted that with rising energy prices, traditional oil and gas 

exploration and gathering routes are shrinking or even on the verge of depletion, 

thus the Arctic region should be considered as ‘the last energy base of the 

humankind’ (‘人类最后的能樨基地’). Moreover, the extraction of energy 

resources from the Arctic region would break existing international supply chains 

and thus, it is crucial to elaborate new regulatory bases. Moreover, Li (2015) 

highlighted that China perceives the Arctic region a valuable asset for all 

humankind, despite the fact that Arctic states are aimed to use Non-Arctic states to 

overcome their domestic capital and market issues to enhance their resource 

extraction activities. Moreover, the issue of ice melting increases the interest of 

non-Arctic states such as India, Japan and South Korea in resource extraction and 

shipping, thus it is crucial for China to increase the level of cooperation with these 

14 

states.  

Lu (2011) also claimed that China perceives the issue of ice melting as a 

threat to the wellbeing of China, as it has direct impact on Chinese ecosystems, 

their food security and production. Therefore, author perceive ice melting as 

unconditional security threat for the PRC. Another important variable, which 

affects Chinese behaviour in the region is shipping, as most important maritime 

routes are located near the Southern part of China. However, as Northern regions 

of China are located closer to the Arctic, maritime routes could play an important 

role in development of Chinese regions.  

Yang (2014) stated Chinese participation in Arctic activities should be 

directed to increase the state's potential and reflect the notion of China as a great 

power on several levels. On the global level China should take part in managing 

the Arctic environment, climate change and environmental protection within the 

framework of international organisation such as the UN.  On the regional level 

China should strengthen its relations with the Arctic council by promoting the 

necessity of extraterritorial actors’ involvement. On the bilateral level China 

should cooperate with Arctic states in the fields of science and technology and 

economy in order to gradually become more involved in Arctic affairs.  

Ding & Zhao (2014) provided another vision of the PRC participation in the 

Arctic, which should be based on the Chinese identity as the ‘international 

provider of common goods’, as China is interested in win-win cooperation with its 

partners, which would allow further development of the region.  

Ding & Zhang (2016) continued the issue of Chinese participation in Arctic 

affairs, considering the possibility of establishing new institutes to gain more 

power in decision-making. Hence the concept of ‘Panarctic community’ which 

would allow China to create a new identity as a state, capable of possessing a 

considerable amount of power in the Arctic. Thus, China should promote the 

15 

creation of a new organization with a unique structure, which is not based on the 

interests of Arctic states.  

The issue of balance of power in the Arctic region is also widely popular 

among scholars. According to Conley & Melino (2021) there exist two key points 

which affect the balance of power in the region. The first one is signing the 

Ilulissat declaration by five Arctic states, which provided them with the rights to 

delimitate the outer continental shelf, to protect the environment, to hold scientific 

researches in the maritime area and conduct free navigation.  Another turning point 

which was highlighted by the authors is the admission of China to the Arctic 

Council in 2013, after which the PRC proclaimed itself as a ‘near-Arctic state’. 

Using this status, China managed to increase its economic and military presence in 

the region.  Thus, authors suggest that within several years, China would reach the 

level of influence of Russia in the Arctic. 

Hence the research gap of the study is the analysis of discourse of CCP 

representatives on Arctic affairs within 2013-2024 from the constructivist 

perspective, as due to the lack of studies of CCP representatives’ discourse on 

further involvement in Arctic affairs from the theoretical perspective, there exists 

little information on interdependence of Chinese discourse and its decision-making 

in the region within a given period. Thus, the understanding of the process of 

integrating the Arctic agenda into Chinese foreign policy strategy is crucial for 

further understanding of Chinese behavior internationally.  

The research question of the study is: How did the discourse of 

representatives of CCP on the Arctic region transform within 2013-2024? 

Research structure 

 This study consists of 3 parts. Chapter 1 focuses on methodology, 

theoretical framework of the study and historical context of Chinese involvement 

in Arctic affairs. Chapter 2 focuses on preconditions and continuity of Chinese 

Arctic policies within the timeframe from 2013 to 2017. Chapter 3 provides the 

analysis of the speeches of CCP representatives on Arctic affairs within the period 

of 2018-2024.  

Chapter 1 Methodological, theoretical and historical framework of the 

16 

study 

1.1. Methodology 

Disclaimer: In this work I used an AI-based DeepL translator to make 

correct translations from foreign languages 

The research is based on the analysis of discourse of Chinese representatives 

of  Communist  Party  of  China  to  provide  a  comprehensive  study  of  discourse 

transformation,  analyzing  factors  which  influence  the  behaviour  of  China  and  its 

self-perception in Arctic affairs. The data taken for the research are transcripts of 

speeches,  interviews  and  statements  made  by  Chinese  officials  within  a  given 

period.  The  data  was  taken  from  the  websites  of  the  government  of  China,  the 

official website  of Xinhua  News  agency  and  from  the  website  of  the  ministry  of 

foreign  affairs  of  China.  All  the  data  was  collected  and  analyzed  in  the  Chinese 

language  to  preserve  the  original  meaning.  To  make  the  proper  translation  in 

English, the DeepL translator was used. The qualitative method of data collection 

was used to take into analysis more relevant data based on the timeframe, which 

should  be  from  2013  to  2024,  actor,  who  should  be  the  representative  of  the 

Chinese Communist Party, and topic as this work considers the data on the Arctic 

issues. 

This  study  includes  two  main  methods.  The  first  one  is  policy  analysis, 

which is needed to understand how and why certain policies were adopted within 

the  existing  external  political  environment  and  how  it  affected  this  environment. 

According  to  Browne  et.  al  (2019)  there  exist  three  branches  of  policy  analysis 

where  each  of  them  is  oriented  on  different  analytical  focus,  data  sources  and 

methods.  Thus,  traditional  policy  analysis  is  based  on  facts  viewing  policy  as  an 

authoritative choice and hence taking into consideration behavioral psychology of 

its actors and rational approach. This approach does not include the role of values 

in  the  framework,  aiming  to  make  the  outcomes  more  objective.  The  second 

branch of policy analysis is a mainstream one, where political processes, political 

networks, decision-making and governance processes are at the centre of research. 

17 

This approach is based on the perception of values and the role of political actors, 

as  it  aims  to  study  the  process  of  political  interaction.  The  third  branch  is  the 

interpretive  one,  which  focuses  on 

the  meanings  of  particular  policies, 

analyzing how  policies  are  identified  and  framed  within  governmental  discourse. 

In this study, the interpretive orientation of policy analysis is applied to study the 

relations between official Chinese discourse on Arctic affairs and decision-making. 

Moreover,  as  authors  stated,  in  interpretive  policy  analysis,  policy  issues  are 

considered to emerge due to historical and cultural factors. Also, Hastings (1998) 

stated that in this approach discourse and argumentation are taken into account as 

an integral part of decision-making process, thus, claiming that interpretive policy 

analysis is a method to study official discourse using statements, documents, and 

transcripts  of  speeches  of  officials,  as  well  as  to  combine  it  with  the  discourse 

analysis, which is also another method used in the study. In  addition, interpretive 

policy analysis allows to study frames within the discourse. According to Rein & 

Schön (1993) frames are based on actor’s beliefs and perceptions which also affect 

the decision-making. 

The  second  method  used  in  this  study  is  discourse  analysis,  which  is 

essential to analyze the meaning of words in speeches of CCP representatives that 

were published by Xinhua News Agency, the government of the PRC and MFA of 

the PRC. Discourse analysis allows to study goals and motivations of policymakers, 

as Hansen (2013) stated that foreign policy actors are  aimed to present a foreign 

policy  which  would  be  considered  as  most  appropriate  and  legitimate  for  the 

population. Hence, the author claimed, that policymakers use the state's identity to 

make their actions more legitimate in the eyes of the population. State’s identity is 

not  always  based  on  historical  heritage,  but  may  be  adjusted  to  modern  reality. 

Moreover, as Hansen (2013) outlined, for any fact based on a state's interests and 

identity  to  become  influential  to  foreign  policy  it  is  essential  to  be  collected  and 

distributed by media, individuals or institutions. Moreover, Kristeva (1980) created 

a  concept  of  intertextuality,  which  implies  that  all  the  official  foreign  policy 

statements  and  speeches  are  not  isolated,  but  rather  located  within  the  societal 

18 

discourse,  which  also  includes  academic  articles  and  journalist  works.   Thus, 

discourse analysis of this study is based not only on the materials provided by the 

MOFA and the government of China, but also by the Xinhua News agency, which 

is one of the most influential media in China dedicated to political affairs. 

1.1.2. Potential shortcomings, limitations and expected outcomes  

One potential shortcoming of this study is overemphasis on the role of 

representatives of Chinese Communist Party in shaping the direction of Chinese 

politics in the Arctic region. Thus, the role of discourse among representatives of 

entrepreneurships and business are not taken into consideration in a full sense. 

This research also has several limitations. One of them is the fact that the 

study provides analysis of speeches made only by representatives of CCP. Another 

limitation is the timeframe from 2013 to 2024. 

The expected outcomes of the research are the analysis of the transformation 

of the CCP representatives’ discourse on the Arctic region within the period of 

2013-2024. Moreover, another expected outcome is the analysis of the role of 

Chinese identity in shaping Arctic policies of China which would provide an 

understanding of Chinese decision-making process within their foreign policy.  

 
 
 
1.2. Theoretical framework  

19 

The  theory  of  constructivism  was  applied  to  this  study  in  order  to  analyze 

factors  which  shape the  CCP  representatives’  discourse on  Arctic  affairs. One  of 

the main features of the constructivist theory is that it allows us to analyze the role 

of  a  state's  identity  in  its  foreign  policy  making.  As  Wendt  (1992)  stated, 

constructivism  is  a  theory  of  international  relations,  which  puts  identities  of  the 

states  at  the  centre  of  their  interaction.   Moreover,  according  to  Wendt  (1999), 

international  structure  is  shaped  by  the  ideas  and  perceptions  of  its  actors  and 

therefore  state’s  interests  and  identities  are  developing  within  the  process  of 

interaction.  Thus,  in  constructivism  state’s  interests  and  identity  as  well  as  their 

influence  on  state’s  discourse  and  decision-making  have  larger  influence  than 

material factors.  

Kratochwil (2018) argued that the state's identity is shaped by its historical 

background  which  also  determined  the  attitude  of  the  state  towards  its  further 

strategy  and  development.  Moreover,  Kratochwil  (2018)  claimed  that  as  the 

knowledge,  wishes,  skills  and  identities  of  individuals  are  different  and  unique 

they  should  be  studied  separately,  without  aiming  to  establish  causal  relations 

between various occasions. However, as Kristeva (1980) outlined, that speeches of 

officials  are  not  isolated,  but  rather  existing  in  the  discourse  within  the  society. 

Therefore, actions of individuals could also be considered as a response or reaction 

to other actions or statements made within the state or in the international system. 

Thus,  this  study  aims  to  analyze  the  role  of  discourse  on  continuity  of  Chinese 

Arctic policies, considering representatives of Communist Party of China as actors 

of  the  discourse,  who  provide  consistent  policy based  on  the  state's  interests  and 

identity.  

However, the role of identity may be ambiguous as Latin (1998) argued that 

identity is not always socially constructed, as it may also be chosen by the actors 

based  on  their  current  needs.  Thus,  the  role  of  identity  is  still  one  of  the  major 

variables  in  constructivist  theory,  but  its  origins  should  be  studied  in  every  case 

separately,  considering  also  major  points  which  affected  the  policy  shift  and 

20 

dynamics.  

Jepperson et. al (1996) recognized the role of norms and practices within the 

international  system 

in 

the  constructivist  perspective.  Authors  claimed 

that understanding  of  actors  and  development  of  the  relations  between  them 

happens through the usage of norms and practices. Hence norms and practices are 

the tools to shape identity of the state, which allow to define which actions of one 

state would make other actors respond in a manner that the state expects.  

Habermas  (2003)  supported  the  idea  of  combining  discourse  analysis  and 

constructivist theory, as he studied the role of discourse in international relations, 

claiming  that  arguments  provided  by  the  states  are  also  socially  constructed  and 

thus constructivist theory is applicable to the discourse analysis as it provides more 

comprehensive  study  of  the  process.  Thus,  in  studies  where  the  identity  has  the 

main role in shaping the behavior of the state, discourse analysis could be useful in 

revealing interests, motivations and incentives of the actors.  

Finnemore  &  Sikkink  (2001)  also pointed out that discourse plays  a major 

role in elaborating new social understanding of politics and its processes as well as 

bringing new social norms. Thus, the developing discourse of China on its role in 

the Arctic  as  a  near-Arctic state and  Arctic  stakeholder  could be  considered  as a 

new approach towards further integration of China in regional and global politics. 

 
 
21 

1.3. Historical context of the Chinese involvement in Arctic affairs  

The perception of the Arctic region as a part of Chinese political discourse 

and the role that China should take in the Arctic has undergone significant changes 

throughout recent decades. What is more, Chinese modern vision of the Arctic 

region was shaped by previously existing ideas and logic behind them. Therefore, 

in order to provide a comprehensive understanding of Chinese discourse and 

policy making under the presidency of Xi Jinping, it is essential to study the 

history of Chinese involvement in the Arctic region. Moreover, as according to the 

constructivist theory actors have influence on state’s identity and state’s interests, 

the changing perception of the Arctic within Chinese policymaking could partly be 

a result of the influence of political leaders and their ability to react to changes in 

the external environment. Hence, this study provides an overview of the 

transformation of Chinese attitude towards the Arctic region since the last decades 

of the XX century.   

According to Liu (2021) one of the first attempts of China to engage in 

Arctic affairs was in 1925 when China joined the Svalbard treaty which allowed 

states to participate in commercial activities on the territory of Svalbard. Still, the 

impact of Chinese involvement in the Arctic region was not high up to the 

establishment of Chinese Arctic and Antarctic administration (CAA), which was 

opened as the result of Deng Xiaoping openness reform1. The CAA aimed to 

coordinate all Chinese Arctic programmes and elaborate Chinese Arctic strategy. 

According to Zuenko (2024) in 1980s China established the Polar research institute 

of China, which coordinates polar stations and conducts researches about Arctics. 

Zuenko (2024) also stated that in 1994 China bought its first icebreaker ‘Xuelong’ 

from Ukraine, which for the first time traversed Northeast passage only in 2012, 

showing the increasing pace of Chinese engagement in Arctic affairs, as the 

“Xuelong” icebreaker became the first vehicle and platform of Chinese scientific 

missions in the Arctic region.  

1 “About Us” Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration, accessed May 1, 2024, Retrieved 
from:https://web.archive.org/web/20100307224446/http://www.chinare.gov.cn/en/index.html?pid=about  

 
 
22 

The modest involvement of China in Arctic affairs could be also explained 

by the bipolar world order which left no opportunities for third states to promote 

stable Arctic policies. Hence, according to Bertelsen (2025) during the 20th 

century the Arctic region was divided between two superpowers, the USSR and the 

US leaving other states no possibility to accumulate their power in the region. 

Bertelsen (2025) outlined that the cooperation between 5 Arctic states was 

regulated by several agreements, such as the Polar Bear Treaty which was signed 

in 1973 to preserve the existing population of polar bears as well as to regulate 

ecological environment and ship passage. Hence, the approach towards Arctic 

governance during the Cold War was primarily based on the realist perception of 

the world order by both the US and the USSR, which lasted up to the end of Cold 

War, when as Bertelsen (2022) stated, the existing order changed due to the post 

Cold War dynamics, as the US established Western-led governmental institutions 

in the Arctic based on liberal perception of the world order. Thus, China had to 

integrate into these organizations in order to increase its influence and promote 

itself as a powerful state.  

Kienko (2019) stated that in 1996 China became a member of the 

International Arctic Science Committee to cooperate with other states in Arctic 

research as well as to increase its role in the Arctic region and highlight to other 

states the capability of the PRC to be a player in the Arctic. Kienko (2019) also 

noted that in 2004 the first Chinese scientific research station called Yellow River 

was built, thus increasing the number of Chinese researchers in the Arctic as well 

as promoting China as a provider of scientific knowledge and possible partner in 

the Arctic region.  

According to Lanteigne & Ping (2015) the rapid involvement in Arctic 

affairs coincided with the start of Chinese naval strategy proclaimed by former 

Chinese president Hu Jintao, which implied conceptualization of missions, values 

and priorities of the People’s Liberation Army Navy. Lanteigne & Ping (2015) 

outlined that the improvement of Chinese naval power along with Chinese rhetoric 

on the interpretation of UNCLOS which implies that all the states have a right to 

23 

be engaged in the Arctic affairs as the Arctic should be open to every state led to 

changing in perception of China by other states considering China as an 

expansionist state. However, authors claimed that China has its core interests 

which are located in the East and South China seas and that is why the PRC 

behaves in a more active and aggressive manner near its borders, whereas the 

Arctic region is not considered by China as a part of its core interests.  

Nevertheless, from the beginning of the 21th century China gradually started 

to consider the Arctic region as an important part of its foreign policy, thus aiming 

to shape the vision of China as a state with a right to participate in the Arctic 

governance. Thus, Kornev (2022) outlined that in the early 2000s China created a 

vertical map of the world, which helped to visualize Chinese attitude towards 

modern geopolitical situations. Thus, the vertical map of the world shows the 

proximity of China to the Arctic region, implying that from the perspective of the 

vertical map, China is relatively closer to the Arctic. Moreover, Kornev (2022) 

states that in 2010 China started its fourth Arctic scientific expedition which was 

oriented on acquiring the information about possible negative drawbacks of ice 

melting in the Arctic region, which is relevant for all states including China, and 

thus China as a large state with sufficient level of economic and scientific 

capabilities has to address this issue. Kornev (2022) also highlighted that within 

this period China started to expand its influence on resource extraction, as in 2010 

the Chinese government started considering the participation in the exploration of 

the Arctic resources, thus aiming to improve its relations with the Arctic states.  

Another important part of Chinese Arctic discourse is the creation of 

concepts to legitimize Chinese presence in the region. The first concept was “near-

Arctic state” (“近北极国家”), which according to Shuang (2021) started to be 

used by Chinese scientists since 2010 to define the states with geographical 

proximity to Arctic region and maritime routes. Still, the concept did not have 

defined criteria for states to be called ‘Near-Arctic states’. Therefore, as Shuang 

(2021) outlined, the Chinese government shifted to the concept of “Arctic 

stakeholder” (“北极利益攸关者”) which left more opportunities for Chinese 

24 

government and entrepreneurs to continue their actions in Arctic. Both concepts 

are analyzed in the next chapter of the study to study how the Chinese discourse on 

Arctic affairs was shaped within 2013-2024.  

 
 
1.4. Relations between China and Arctic states 

25 

To provide a comprehensive analysis of the transformation of the discourse 

of representatives of Communist Party of China on Arctic affairs, this study 

includes an overview of relations between China and eight Arctic states.  

1.4.1. US-China relations in the Arctic region 

 Bertelsen (2025) outlined two major approaches towards further 

development of Sino-American relations after the growth of China became 

noticeable in the late 1990s. The first vision was presented 25 years ago by Joseph 

Nye, who was liberal institutionalist and policy maker in the administration of 

president Clinton claimed that China would eventually integrate in Western-

dominated institutions and would have to preserve the existing world order as 

China already did by entering the WTO as a result of its economic growth.  Nye 

awaited further openness and liberalisation of the PRC as a result of its economic 

growth, which, as the author stated, proved to be false and ethnocentric. There was 

another approach towards further dynamics of Chinese foreign policy which would 

directly affect its behavior in the Arctic region, which was presented by John 

Mearsheimer, who outlined that the US should pursue the containment strategy 

against China in order to prevent its straightening and becoming a regional 

hegemon in East Asia. This vision explains modern trade wars and competition in 

the spheres of science and technology between two states, as well as Chinese 

foreign policy behaviour based on establishing non-Western-led world order by 

creating non-Western international organizations such as the Shanghai Cooperation 

Organization and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank to establish parallel 

institutions with the Western ones in order to achieve the leading role in the Asian 

region, as well as in other regions through the Belt and Road Initiative.  

As nowadays both China and the US are two largest world economies, there 

is no doubt that their competition also expands on the Arctic region. The US aims 

to prevent increasing influence of China on Arctic states, as Bertelsen (2025) states 

that the US pressures the Kingdom of Denmark to not accept Chinese investments 

and reject proposals from Chinese to rent territory of Denmark.  Hence the US 

26 

aims to prevent further integration of China into the system of Arctic governance, 

as well as the increase of its participation of its companies in building 

infrastructure on the territory of Arctic states and the number of Chinese research 

bases and missions in the Arctic region.  According to US Department of Defense 

(2019) the US in their Arctic strategy outlined that China poses a threat to Arctic 

security, as China has no legal basis for its presence in Arctic and the US does not 

recognize the Chinese concept of ‘Near-Arctic state’, but the PRC despite having 

no military presence in the region, still aims to get more power in the Arctic by 

making investments in projects of Arctic states and promoting BRI initiative, thus 

using the Arctic region to achieve their strategic goals, which could also imply that 

the Arctic region becomes a part of Chinese strategic interests. Such a vision of 

China by the US was continued in the next US Arctic Strategy, which was 

published in 2022. According to White House (2022) the US is concerned about 

China continuing to engage in Arctic affairs, especially taking into account the fact 

that the PRC expanded its icebreaker fleet and for the first time Chinese naval 

vessels reached the Arctic. According to US Department of Defense (2024),  for 

the US it is important to address the issue of cooperation between Russia and 

China in the Arctic region. Moreover, according to US Department of Defense 

(2024), it is necessary to prevent the threat of Chinese presence in the region, 

which stresses that the US preserves China as a competitor despite its attempts to 

frame their activities in the Arctic as a mutually beneficial cooperation.   

 1.4.2. Russia-China relations in the Arctic region 

The Russia-China relations in the Arctic region faced significant 

improvement over the last decades. Sheng (2022) noted that since 2008 the level of 

cooperation between China and Russia has been increasing. Also, both states share 

a similar vision of the world order standing against hegemony and promoting 

multipolar world order. Major directions of China-Russia partnership are trade, 

traditional security where China and Russia hold joint military exercises, and non-

traditional security. Consequently, such types of bilateral activities led to 

cooperation in other spheres, such as Russia’s support of the BRI initiative. As 

27 

Kulintsev (2023) stated, China perceives Russia as one of its most important 

partners, as China understands that the development of the EAEU is one of the 

major goals for Russia, where China could provide investments in EAEU projects 

and economic assistance in economic recovery of Russian regions, such as Siberia 

and Far East, which would make the cooperation between two states mutually 

beneficial.   

Kolzina & Mindubaeva (2020) highlighted the importance of the Polar Silk 

Road in the development of Russia-China relations in the Arctic. Thus, according 

to Kolzina & Mindubaeva (2020), Polar Silk Road, is a continuation of One Belt 

One Road Initiative, aimed at developing Arctic shipping routes. However, as the 

Polar Silk Road is partly located at the Russian shipping lanes, Russia becomes an 

important partner in the project. What is more, Kolzina & Mindubaeva (2020) also 

stated that China is developing Arctic tourism, which is also beneficial for Russia, 

as it could provide more opportunities for the commercial exploitation of the 

Northern Sea Route (NSR).   

However, the form of integration of NSR into the Polar Silk Road is not 

defined yet, as the NSR is vital for Russian strategic interests. Another important 

factor which influences the cooperation within the BRI frameworks is the 

perception of the NSR by the two states, as according to Strelnikova (2025) China 

shares the vision that the Arctic is open for everyone, whereas Russia considers 

that Arctic states have exclusive rights to the Arctic region. Hence, such 

fundamental difference in the approach towards the NSR flowers the pace of 

cooperation between two states. Devyatkin (2024) also wrote about the fact, that 

China, similar to the US, consider NSR as a part of international waters, such 

vision together with the existence of espionage cases such as the arrest of the 

President of Russia’s Arctic Academy of Sciences Valery Mitko in 2020, when he 

was accused of sharing state secret technologies with the PRC make author come 

to the conclusion that the cooperation between China and Russia in the Arctic 

region is limited due to the strategic reasons.  

28 

Nevertheless, Wang (2022) states that for China it is relatively easier to 

expand its influence in Arctic affairs through Russia than through any other Arctic 

state. Therefore, China invests a lot into the Russian Arctic, especially in mining 

and shipping. China invested into the building of a deep-water seaport in 

Arkhangelsk which would be a base for Chinese Arctic shipping. Therefore, the 

cooperation between Russia and China in the Arctic region could be considered as 

strategically beneficial for both sides, but still as Kopra & Puranen (2021) stated 

Russia does not aim at having a strong Chinese presence in their Arctic, thus 

making the relations between two states more complicated.  

1.4.3. China-Finland relations on the Arctic region 

According to Koivurova et. al (2019), despite the fact that Finland was one 

of the first Western states to recognize the PRC and establish diplomatic relations 

in  1952, due  to  the  existence  of  the  Agreement  of  Friendship,  Cooperation,  and 

Mutual Assistance between the Soviet Union and Finland which lasted from 1948 

to  1992  the  relations  between  Finland  and  China  were  moderate.  Only  after  the 

openness reforms carried out by Deng Xiaoping did the main development of Sino-

Finnish relations begin. Koivurova et. al (2019) also claimed that the cooperation 

between two states in the Arctic region increased after the visit of president Xi in 

Finland in 2017, as the leaders signed a joint declaration, marking areas in which 

further  development  is  prioritized.  Among  such  sectors  are  energy,  tourism  and 

winter sports. During the visit several sectoral agreements were signed to provide a 

legal basis for  cooperation in trade and technology. Such actions are in line with 

the  Arctic  strategy  of  Finland,  which  was  published  in  2013.  According  to  the 

Finland  Prime  Minister’s  office  (2013),  the  bilateral  cooperation with non-Arctic 

states is considered to be beneficial for Finland.   

One of the main directions of cooperation between China and Finland in the 

Arctic  region  is  partnership  in  the  scientific  field.  According  to  Koivurova  et.  al 

(2019) as China always considers climate change as one of the main issues which 

it should cover in the Arctic, the PRC actively engages in scientific research and is 

open for cooperation with other states. Therefore in 2013 the China-Nordic Arctic 

29 

Research Centre (CNARC) was opened in Shanghai to create a platform through 

which scientists from Lapland collaborate with Chinese researchers. Koivurova et. 

al  (2019)  also  noted  that  these  researches  are  not  primarily  concerned  with  the 

issue  of  climate  change,  as  some  authors  of  this  report were  also  engaged  in  the 

research conducted by the Arctic Centre of the University of Lapland and Wuhan 

university  on  the  comparison  of  legal  positions  of  states  of  the  European  Union, 

the PRC and Finland towards major Arctic issues such as shipping, fishing and the 

rights of indigenous population in the Arctic. Hence in some areas of cooperation, 

such as the scientific one, the relations between two states are stable developing.  

Nevertheless, Finland being the part of the European Union and NATO also 

questions the motivation behind Chinese participation in Arctic affairs as well as 

does not want to threaten interests of Finland and raise the dependency of its Arctic 

regions  on  Chinese  investments. As  Kopra  &  Puranen  (2021) stated,  in 2018 the 

Polar  Research  Institute  of  China  aimed  to  buy  or  rent  the  Airport  near  the  city 

Kemijarvi, located in the Eastern Lapland. However, the deal was blocked by the 

Finnish Defence forces due to their security concerns, as Kemijarvi is located near 

the  main  Finnish  artillery  range  Rovajrvi.  The  authors  implied  that  building  the 

infrastructure  near  the  airport  and  creation  of  scientific  base  on  the  territory  of 

Kemijarvi  would  allow  China  to  large  expand  their  influence  in  the  region, 

improving the Chinese polar military capabilities, as the PRC is still developing its 

own navigation system BeiDou2 and needs more data before starting to increase its 

military  presence  in  the  Arctic  region,  basically  moving  its  strategic  nuclear 

submarines to patrol under the polar ice.  

Moreover, as Kopra & Puranen (2021) outlined, the official proclamation of 

China of its identity of ‘Near-Arctic state’ in White Paper on the Arctic region in 

2018 led to increased suspicions on true ambitions of China from the Arctic states. 

As five out of eight Arctic states are members of NATO, they are unwilling to let 

China  invest  into  critical  infrastructure  of  their  Arctic  territories,  making  them 

more dependent on the Chinese side.  

1.4.4. Sino-Danish relations in the Arctic 

30 

Modern  relations  between  China  and  Denmark  in  the  Arctic  region  are 

characterized by the necessity for China to diversify its relations with Arctic states 

in order to get international recognition as an Arctic player as well as to increase its 

presence  in  the  region  by  establishing  new  scientific  bases  and  holding  bilateral 

projects  with  Denmark.  Moreover,  China  needs  resources  located  in  Greenland 

such as iron ore and uranium to develop their domestic industries and increase the 

pace of production. Therefore, China had a long strategy of establishing stable and 

good relations with the Dutch government. In 2008 Joint Statement Between China 

and  Denmark  on  Establishment  of  Comprehensive  Strategic  Partnership 2  was 

signed  to promote  comprehensive  strategic  partnership  between  two  states, 

deepening trade relations between two states and highlighting joint cooperation in 

the field of climate change and environmental protection, thus creating a legal base 

for further projects in the Arctic region. However, in the second half of 2010s the 

level of cooperation between two states started to decrease. It happened due to the 

fact, that as Bertelsen (2025) stated, Denmark is willing to limit the possibilities of 

Greenland  to  acquire  more  power  and  influence,  thus  becoming  able  to  make 

policies  less  dependent  on  Denmark  or  starting  to  rely  on  other  states  such  as 

China  which  could  contribute  to  the  rapid  growth  of  the  economy  of  Greenland, 

becoming an influencer in the region. Moreover, Bertelsen (2025) highlighted, that 

relations between Denmark and the USA affect possible involvement of China in 

the development of Greenland, as the US aims to limit the rising power of the PRC 

in  the  region  through  influencing  bilateral  relations  between  China  and  pro-

Western  states  such  as  Denmark.  Bertelsen  (2025)  analyzed  the  example  of  the 

Chinese  proposition  to  establish  a  research  station  in  Greenland,  which  would 

consist of a satellite ground station. The government of Greenland welcomed this 

proposition,  whereas  the  Denmark  government  reacted  negatively  to  such  an 

idea.  As Bertelsen (2025) outlined, both Denmark and the US would never allow 

China to build a research station or satellite station in interest as it contradicts with 

2  “Joint Statement Between China and Denmark on Establishment of Comprehensive Strategic Parnership” China 
Internet Information Center, accessed May 1, 2025, Retrieved from: 
http://www.china.org.cn/government/news/2008-10/25/content_16664479.htm 

 
31 

the  Danish  perception  of  security  as  well  as  with  the  US  strategic  interests. 

Therefore,  the  US  Department  of  Defense  made  pressure  on  the  Danish 

government to reject the Chinese proposition. Bislev et. al (2018) also pointed to 

the  strategic  importance  of  Greenland  in  the  relations  between  Denmark  and  the 

US, claiming that both American and Danish sides would not let China engage in 

large  investment  projects  in  order to  preserve status quo in the  region.   Kopra & 

Puranen  (2021)  also  claimed  that  unwillingness  of  the  Dutch  government  to  let 

China  engage  in  providing  investments  and  building  infrastructure  in  Greenland 

could  be  explained  by  the  threat  of  getting  Greenland  dependent  on  Chinese 

investments  as  well  as  getting  stable  relations  between  the  PRC  and  Greenland, 

whereas Greenland as an autonomous region aims to cooperate more with China in 

order to become less dependent on Denmark.   

What  is  more,  the  scientific  direction  of  cooperation  between  China  and 

Denmark  also  faces  significant  decline,  as  Bertelsen  (2025)  noted  that  nowadays 

Denmark does not participate in China Nordic Arctic Research Center (CNARC), 

as the Nordic institute of Asian studies at the University of Copenhagen was closed, 

leaving  less  possibilities  to  promote  bilateral  scientific  cooperation.  Therefore, 

modern relations between two states are moderate due to the increased suspicions 

of Denmark towards Chinese actions in the Arctic region and American aspirations 

to protect Greenland from Chinese influence.  

1.4.5. Sino-Icelandic relations in the Arctic 

China  and  Iceland  share  a  history  of  cooperation  in  the  Arctic  region, 

focusing on mutually beneficial cooperation and development of the Arctic region. 

The cooperation increased since 2013 when Iceland signed a free trade agreement 

with China3 , thus supporting the observer status of the PRC in the Arctic Council. 

After  that  both  sides  put  a  lot  of  effort  into  creation  and  maintenance  of  good 

relations  and  partnership  in  the  region,  as  Nielsen  (2019)  outlined  that  China  is 

3 “Free Trade Agreement between Iceland and China” Government of Iceland, accessed May 1, 2025, Retrieved 
from: https://www.government.is/topics/foreign-affairs/external-trade/free-trade-agreements/free-trade-agreement-
between-iceland-and-china/  

 
 
32 

interested in Icelandic studies on clean energy and Arctic science to cooperate in 

the sphere of  climate change and environment protection, which reflects Chinese 

adherence  to  its  initial  aims  of  dealing  with  these  challenges  as  a  global  power. 

What is more, Bertelsen (2025) also claimed that 2013 was a turning point in Sino-

Icelandic  partnership  in  the  Arctic  region,  as  after  the  official  visit  of  Chinese 

premier  Wen  Jiabao  to  Iceland  both  sides  agreed  to  establish  the  China  Nording 

Arctic  Research  Center  in  2013,  using  CNARC  as  a  platform  for  meetings  of 

China  and  Nordic  states  on  the  topic  of  Arctic  affairs.  Bertelsen  (2025)  also 

pointed to the creation of China Iceland Arctic Observatory (CIAO), which opened 

in 2018 in Karholl to study aurora and upper atmosphere research. However, the 

collaboration  was  complicated  by  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The  author  also 

claimed that nowadays the US pressures Iceland to close the CIAO to stop Chinese 

engagement in Arctic affairs.   

Nevertheless,  the  government  of  Iceland  is  interested  in  cooperation  with 

China.  As  Hastings  (2014)  stated,  Iceland  considers  the  Arctic  as  an  instrument 

through which it can achieve significant gains and boost its economy. Therefore, as 

the author emphasized, Iceland uses the concept of ‘coastal Arctic state’ to show 

its  identity  as  an  Arctic  player.  Thus,  Iceland  strives  for  promotion  of  Arctic 

tourism  not  only  due  to  the  economic  benefits,  but  also  to  frame  Iceland  as  a 

coastal  Arctic  state  in  the  international  discourse  and  increase  overall  global 

visibility of a state. Hence, unlike other European states, Iceland mostly considers 

China not as a threat but as an opportunity to raise its position on the international 

arena.  Moreover,  Hastings  (2014)  claimed  that  Iceland  considers  that  China  is 

aware  of  the  risks  given  by  climate  change,  as  the  rise  of  sea  level  and  climate 

shifts could directly affect the well-being of the PRC. Therefore, Iceland perceives 

China as a state which is aimed to mitigate the risks in order to overcome possible 

threat of climate change drawbacks.   

1.4.6. Sino-Swedish relations in the Arctic 

According to Zakhariev (2018), initially the relations between China and 

Sweden were moderate due to political tensions, such as the conflict which 

33 

emerged after Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo was awarded with the Nobel Peace 

prize in 2010. Zakhariev (2018) also implies that the relations between two states 

shifted to a more positive dynamic in 2013, when the administration of president 

Xi came to power. Zakhariev also (2018) outlined that for China the cooperation 

with Sweden in fields of space and navigation is important, as for the PRC the 

usage of satellites is crucial in provisioning of accurate navigation routes for its 

ships. Bertelsen (2025) also considers scientific cooperation as an important part of 

Sino-Swedish cooperation in the region, as in 2016 the China Remote Sensing 

Satellite North Polar Ground Station (CNPGS) was built near Kiruna city on the 

Swedish territory of Lapland. The author noted that the creation of such a system 

raised the efficiency of satellite data transmission, leaving for China more 

possibilities to improve their maritime navigation.  

As Bertelsen (2025) outlined, Sweden had withdrawn from China Nordic 

Arctic Research Center (CNARC), decreasing the level of cooperation between 

two states in the Arctic.  

1.4.7. Sino-Norwegian relations in the Arctic   

Liu (2021) stated that Sino-Norwegian relations in the Arctic region started 

in 1925 when China joined the Svalbard treaty, enabling China to participate in 

resource exploration on the territory of Svalbard. However, according to Zakhariev 

(2018), nowadays Norway perceives this treaty in a negative way, as all parties of 

the treaty could exploit Svalbard, and China is largely involved in the resources 

extraction process in Svalbard.   

Nevertheless, as China could invest in Arctic projects in Svalbard, Norway 

cooperates with the PRC to modernize the infrastructure of its Arctic territories and 

accumulate  investments.  Hence,  Zuenko  (2024)  highlighted  that  in  2003  China 

established  its  first  research  base  called  the  Yellow  River  on  the  territory  of  the 

Arctic. Through the base China conducts research on issues of climate change and 

34 

development  of  polar  technology.  The  base  also  cooperates  with  China  Nordic 

Arctic Research Center (CNARC) with Norway as a member4.  

Another  important  point  of  cooperation  between  China  and  Norway  in  the 

Arctic  is  the  possible  exploitation  of  Kirkiness  by  China.  As  Zakhariev  (2018) 

outlined,  China aims to use Kirkenes city  for ship transition, as Kirkes has more 

developed infrastructure that Murmansk.  

However,  the  relations  between  two  states  are  influenced  by  the  US 

aspirations  to  control  Arctic  order.  Therefore  Zakhariev  (2018)  wrote  that 

nowadays the US wants to minimize the export of technologies such as deep-water 

drilling  rigs  and  ecological  fishery  from  Norway  to  Russia  and  China.  Thus,  the 

US attempts to slow the pace of cooperation between China and Norway as well as 

Norwegian perception of the PRC as a possible threat to the existing order limits 

the level of partnership between two states, still leaving room for joint research and 

infrastructure projects.  

1.4.8. China-Canada relations in the Arctic  

Zakhariev (2018) claimed that PRC cooperates least with the US and Canada 

in the Arctic region, where unlike US, Canada has no independent cooperation 

with the PRC in the Arctic region. Therefore, according to Zakhariev (2018), 

Canada as a US ally often aims to limit Chinese involvement in Arctic affairs 

withing the framework of the Arctic council. Despite that, Zakhariev (2018) 

considered that China could potentially develop infrastructure of Canadian Arctic 

territories, which is beneficial for Canada and China as well, as China aims to 

diversify its relations with Arctic states.  

What is more, as Zakhariev (2018) outlined, the large Chinese community 

could play a main role in improving relations between two states, as the Chinese 

Community in Canada is integrated in the domestic economy and decision-making, 

which provides more opportunities for Chinese companies and enterprises to 

collaborate with Canadian companies. Thus, the usage of already existing channels 

4 “Nordic members” China-Nordic Arctic Research Center, accessed May 1, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.cnarc.info/members/nordic-members  

 
 
of communication such as the Chinese community could allow China to increase 

35 

the level of cooperation with Canada.  

1.5. Chapter conclusion 

In conclusion, within several decades China managed to gradually develop 

its presence in the Arctic region by starting scientific expeditions, signing contracts 

with foreign companies and improving bilateral relations with Arctic states. China 

presents its involvement in Arctic affairs as a win-win cooperation for Arctic states 

to achieve mutually beneficial gains. The main aspects of cooperation are 

environmental protection, development of maritime routes and Arctic studies. 

Nevertheless, the cooperation is limited due to the fact that many Arctic states, 

especially European ones, perceive China as a possible threat, thus preventing its 

dominance in the region.  

The foreign policy direction chosen by president Xi after he came to power 

in 2013 has significantly changed bilateral relations with Arctic states. Xi’s 

administration managed to resolve old conflicts, such as the dispute with Sweden 

over the Nobel Peace prize award in 2010 given to Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo. 

Moreover, China aims to establish channels for long-term relations with Arctic 

countries, still aiming to diversify its relations with as many Arctic states as 

possible. Also, such actions help China in achieving international recognition as an 

Arctic player. Nevertheless, such actions from the Chinese side faces constraints 

from the USA, as the US aims to limit cooperation of China with other Arctic 

states in order to prevent it from growing its presence in the region, as for the US 

both China and China-Russia activities in the Arctic region are considered as a 

threat.  

 
 
Chapter 2 The Chinese discourse on Arctic affairs within the period of 

36 

2013-2017 

Introduction  

The start of the presidency of Xi Jinping in 2013 led to the increasing role of 

China in the Arctic region, as president Xi’s administration was aimed to maintain 

already  existing  channels  of  involvement  in  Arctic  affairs,  such  as  scientific 

expeditions,  joint  projects  with  Arctic  states,  including  investments  in  their 

infrastructure.  Therefore,  during  this  period  the  PRC  aimed  to  diversify  the 

channels of its presence in the region as well as deepen the cooperation with Arctic 

and Non-Arctic states to justify its presence in the region. Simultaneously with that, 

the  PRC  proceeded  with  bridging  its  actions  in  the  Arctic  region  with  domestic 

discourse,  aligning  it  with  broader  policies,  such  as  the  necessity  to  reach  the 

Community  of  Common  Destiny  for  Mankind,  which  was  proclaimed  by  Xi 

Jinping  in  2012 5 .  This  chapter  analyzes  speeches  and  statements  of  Chinese 

officials  published  by  the  PRC  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  (MFA),  the 

Government of the PRC and Xinhua news agency which were published within the 

period of 2013-2017.  

The  aims  of  this  chapter  are  to  analyze  main  directions  of  Chinese  Arctic 

policies and the discourse around them to highlight continuity and transformation 

within the discourse during the period of 2013-2017, starting with the compliance 

of  the  discourse  with  its  direction  in  previous  periods,  then  outlining  major 

changes  in  the  discourse  since  the  beginning  of  Xi  Jinping’s  presidency,  next 

studying  the  impact  of  the  concept  of   Community  of  Common  Destiny  for 

Mankind  on  Arctic  discourse  of  CCP  representatives  and  finally  analyzing  the 

discourse around environmental policies in the Arctic region.  

2.1.  Compliance  with  previous  direction  of  the  discourse  of  CCP 

representatives on Arctic affairs 

5  “Writing a New Chapter of Peaceful Development -- 10th Anniversary of President Xi Jinping's Concept of 
Building a Community of Human Destiny” People’s daily, accessed May 1, 2025, Retrieved from: 
http://politics.people.com.cn/n1/2023/0325/c1001-32651059.html [谱写和平发展新篇章——习近平主席提出构
建人类命运共同体理念十周年] 

 
37 

To  analyze  the  continuity  and  change  in  the  discourse  of  Chinese 

representatives of CCP on Arctic affairs it is essential to understand which trends 

in  Chinese  discourse  on  arctic  affairs,  which  were  used  in  previous  periods, 

remained in the period of 2013-2017.  

2.1.1. China as a good party to international treaties and organizations 

Participation of China in international treaties in the Arctic region has a long 

history  starting  from  the  Svalbard  treaty  which,  according  to  Liu  (2021), China 

joined in 1925. Therefore, the Chinese government continued the long strategy of 

participation  in  international  agreements  in  order  to  be  considered  as  a  reliable 

actor  which  behavior  is  aligned  with  international  treaties  and  legal  framework. 

Moreover,  the  emphasis  on  adherence  to  the  international  legal  environment  and 

the status of participants in Arctic treaties allows China to legitimize their presence 

in the Arctic region, alongside with its membership in Arctic organizations. Hence, 

Chinese  policymakers  referred  to  Svalbard  treaty  and  the  status  of  China  as  an 

observer in the Arctic Council as to the reason for the justification of the necessity 

for  China  to  participate  in  the  process  of  the  development  of  the  region  and  the 

mechanisms of its governance6.  

What  is  more,  as  main  directions  of  Chinese  Arctic  policies  are 

environmental  protection  and  scientific  projects,  mostly  concerning  the  issue  of 

climate  change  and  its  possible  consequences,  Chinese  politicians  tended  to 

highlight  faithful  fulfilling  the  terms  of  Vienna  Convention  for  the  Protection  of 

the  Ozone  Layer,  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change, 

Convention on Biological Diversity and other treaties which have direct influence 

on the protection of Arctic ecosystems7.  For China it is also important to highlight 

that the PRC also participates in the creation of a new legal framework, such as the 

6  “Deputy Director General of the State Oceanic Administration explains the Regulations on the Administration of 
Administrative Licences for Arctic Expedition Activities” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2017-09/20/content_5226465.htm [国家海洋
局副局长解读《北极考察活动行政许可管理规定》] 
7  “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 

 
38 

elaboration of the Polar Code, which is used for maritime shipping8. Such action 

not only aimed to highlight that the PRC is concerned about the process of Arctic 

governance,  but  also  to  outline  that  China  is  interested  in  global  shipping  and 

especially  Arctic  shipping,  which  also  remains  one  of  the  main  directions  of 

Chinese  Arctic  policies9.  What  is  more,  Chinese  policymakers  denoted  that  any 

development of the Arctic region should be taken in accordance with international 

treaties and laws and in compliance with the domestic laws of the Arctic states10. 

2.1.2. China as a supporter of preserving the sovereignty and interests 

of Arctic states 

Despite the increasing capabilities of China in the Arctic region, taking into 

consideration its investments and projects on the territory of Arctic states, Chinese 

politicians still outline that Arctic states have a leading role in the process of Arctic 

governance, including their status in the Arctic council, as well as the fact that 

Arctic states have sovereign rights on the Arctic territories which China respect, as 

China always respected interests, values and traditions of indigenous people in the 

Arctic region, thus considering them while proceeding with its Arctic policies11. 

Therefore in 2015 the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming said that one 

of the political principles of further involvement in Arctic affairs is ‘the respect for 

the inalienable rights of Arctic States and Arctic Indigenous Peoples’ (‘尊重北极

国家和北极土著人的固有权利’12). Thus, Chinese policymakers stated that the 

well-being of indigenous population in the Arctic depends on the state of the 

Arctic ecosystem, and therefore China as an influencer player together with other 

states has to preserve the existing environmental conditions in order to protect 

8 Ibid.  
9 Ibid.  
10 Ibid. 
11  “Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei answers questions on the acceptance of China as an observer to the 
Arctic Council” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4,2025,  Retrieved 
from:https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/fyrbt_673021/dhdw_673027/201305/t20130515_5432938.shtml [外交部发言人洪
磊就北极理事会接受中国为观察员事答记者问] 
12  “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 

 
local populations13. Therefore, China in its discourse tended to highlight its attitude 

towards state’s sovereignty and willingness to cooperate with Arctic states 

39 

favouring their Arctic status.  

2.1.3. China as a Near-Arctic state 

Within the period of 2013-2017 the PRC continues to promote the idea of 

China being a “Near-Arctic state” (“近北极国家”). According to Shuang (2021), 

China has been using the concept of ‘Near-Arctic state’ by scientists since 2010 to 

legitimize Chinese increasing participation in Arctic affairs and to promote the idea 

of China being an actor in the Arctic region. Hence the representatives of the PRC 

proceeded with using this concept, claiming that geographically China is a ‘Near-

Arctic state’ and therefore all the situations happening in the Arctic including 

environmental changes and resource extraction directly affect stability of China, as 

it covers all the spheres such as climate, agricultural productivity, shipping, trade 

and socio-economic development14.  

2.2. Discourse on Arctic affairs after the start of presidency of Xi 

Jinping 

Within the period of 2013-2017 the discourse of Chinese policies in the 

Arctic region underwent changes due to the fact that the Xi Jinping administration 

brought change into the already existing strategy of Chinese Arctic policies. 

Therefore, this part of the chapter analyzes new trends and directions of the 

discourse of CCP representatives on Arctic affairs. The study proceeds with the 

overview of main directions of CCP representatives’ discourse on Arctic affairs 

and its main features which are depicted on the figure 1. 

Discourse topic  

Year  Author 

Main features 

China as a 

2017  Lin Shangqin, 

1. 

 China adheres to the 

responsible great 

deputy director of 

principles of Arctic 

power 

the State Oceanic 

management.  

13 Ibid. 
14 Ibid. 

 
40 

Administration 

2. 

China has large material 

capabilities to participate in 

Arctic affairs. 

3. 

Involvement of China in 

Arctic affairs is mutually 

beneficial  

China as an ‘Arctic 

2017 

Wang Yi, head of 

1. 

 ‘Arctic stakeholder’ has 

stakeholder’ 

the MFAof the 

a broader meaning than ‘Near-

PRC 

Arctic state’ 

2. 

China is a ‘participant’, 

‘constructor’ and ‘contributor’ 

in Arctic affairs. 

Chinese 

2015  Zhang 

1. 

China recognizes the 

cooperation in 

Arctic region 

Ming,  Vice-

sovereign rights and interests of 

Minister of 

Arctic states  

Foreign Affairs of 

2. 

 China supports interests 

the PRC  

of international community and 

stands for multi-level system of 

Arctic governance  

3. 

China supports rights and 

interests of the indigenous 

Arctic population  

4. 

  China adheres to the 

international law within the 

framework of Arctic 

governance  

Arctic region 

2015 

Wang Yi, head of 

1. 

Arctic development and 

within the 

the MFA of the 

stability benefit everyone  

 
 
 
 
 
41 

framework of the 

PRC 

2. 

China has enough 

Community of 

Common destiny 

for Mankind 

capabilities to maintain and 

improve its involvement in 

Arctic affairs  

Environmental 

2015  Zhang 

1. 

China puts effort in 

protection  

Ming, Vice-

exploration of the Arctic and is 

Minister of 

open for cooperation 

Foreign Affairs of 

2. 

China supports 

the PRC 

sustainable usage and 

development of the Arctic 

region and its resources  

Climate change 

2017  Wang Yang, Vice 

1. 

China pays attention 

Premier of the 

towards climate change and 

PRC 

ecology protection 

2. 

 China is ready to 

participate in improvement of 

institutional mechanisms of 

fighting climate change issue in 

the Arctic region 

Thus,  within  the  period  of  2013-2017  the  deputy  director  of  the  State 

Oceanic  Administration  Lin  Shanqing  claimed  that  China  is  a  “responsible  great 

power” (“负责任大国”)15, which adheres to principles of Arctic management and 

is able to participate in Arctic development, management and exploration due to its 

15 “Deputy Director General of the State Oceanic Administration explains the Regulations on the Administration of 
Administrative Licences for Arctic Expedition Activities” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 
Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2017-09/20/content_5226465.htm [国家海洋
局副局长解读《北极考察活动行政许可管理规定》] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 

large  material  capabilities,  thus  helping  to  achieve  beneficial  outcomes  for  all 

Arctic players16.  

Another  important  part  of  the  CCP  representatives’  discourse  on  Arctic 

affairs  was  the  shift  from  the  concept  of  ‘Near-Arctic  state’ to  the  ‘Arctic 

stakeholder’, which happened in 2017 after the speech of Wang Yi, the head of the 

Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  China 17 .  The  idea  of  China  being  ‘Arctic 

stakeholder’  implies  that  this  concept  is  broader  than  previous  one,  leaving  less 

constraints on Chinese actions in the Arctic region18. Moreover, it allows China to 

change its perception in the region, highlighting that China contributes a lot of its 

efforts  and  finances  in  regional  development,  participates  actively  in  bilateral 

projects with Arctic states, thus being able to participate in further construction of 

the Arctic system19. 

During this period within the political discourse of China the main features 

of Chinese cooperation in the Arctic region were proclaimed by the Vice-Minister 

of Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming20. Thus, it was stressed that China recognizes the 

rights  and  interests  of  Arctic  states  and  indigenous  population  of  the  Arctic.  In 

addition,  China  complies  its  actions  in  the  region  with  international  law  and 

supports  the  idea  of  creation  of  a  multi-level  system  of  Arctic  governance,  thus 

taking into account the interests of the international community in the region21. 

What is more, this study analyses the connection between the discourse on 

Community  of  Common  Destiny  for  Mankind  and  Chinese  discourse  on  Arctic 

affairs.  Main  similarities  were  found  in  the  speeches  of  Wang  Yi,  the  head  of 

Chinese MFA, who stated that the developed and stable Arctic region is beneficial 

16 Ibid.  
17 “Statement by Minister Wang Yi at the Opening Ceremony of the Third Circumpolar Forum Assembly”  The 
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/vom/2015-10/19/content_2950053.htm [王毅部长在第三届北极圈论坛大会开幕
式上的致辞] 
18 Ibid.  
19 Ibid. 
20 “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 
21 Ibid. 

 
43 

for everyone, thus pushing forward Arctic cooperation22. The role of China in the 

process  of  Arctic  development  was  also  highlighted  as  China  has  enough  power 

and material capabilities to actively participate in Arctic affairs, which would lead 

to mutually beneficial outcomes23. 

The  issue  of  environmental  protection  is  also  an  important  part  of  CCP 

representatives'  discourse  on  Arctic  affairs  as  Vice-Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 

Zhang Ming stated that China aims to explore the region and its peculiarities and is 

ready  to  cooperate  with  other  interested  parties24.   Moreover,  it  was  claimed  that 

China  supports  the  sustainable  utilization  of  Arctic  resources  and  sustainable 

development of the region25.  

Moreover,  the  issue  of  climate  change  is  presented  as  one  of  the  main 

directions of Chinese discourse on Arctic affairs, as the Vice Premier of the PRC 

Wang  Yang  stated  that  for  China  the  issue  of  climate  change  remains  of  great 

concern26.Also,  it  is  highlighted  that  China  is  open  for  further  participation  in 

establishing  international  institutions  designed  for  managing  the  climate  change 

issue in the Arctic region27. 

Therefore, the study proceeds with a more detailed analysis of each direction 

of  CCP  representatives'  discourse  on  Arctic  affairs  within  the  period  of  2013-

2017.  

2.2.1. China as a responsible great power (“负责任大国” 28) 

22 “Statement by Minister Wang Yi at the Opening Ceremony of the Third Circumpolar Forum Assembly” The State 
Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/vom/2015-10/19/content_2950053.htm [王毅部长在第三届北极圈论坛大会开幕
式上的致辞] 
23 Ibid. 
24 “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 
25 Ibid. 
26  “Wang Yang Attends 4th International Arctic Forum” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of 
China, accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170330_340778.shtml [汪洋出席第四届国际北极论坛] 
27 Ibid. 
28  “Deputy Director General of the State Oceanic Administration explains the Regulations on the Administration of 
Administrative Licences for Arctic Expedition Activities ”The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 

 
44 

As in 2013 China became an observer state in the Arctic Council, the PRC 

became  more  engaged  in  Arctic  affairs,  thus  leaving  China  the  possibility  to 

actively spread the notion of China being a trustful actor in the region with huge 

material capabilities. Thus, in Chinese discourse on Arctic affairs a new concept of 

China  being  a  ‘responsible  great  power’  (‘ 负责 任大国 ’)  29  started  to  appear. 

Chinese  officials  claim  that  China  is  ready  for  a  more  active  role  in  the  Arctic 

region as China is already integrated into major mechanisms of Arctic governance, 

including the Svalbard treaty and the Arctic Council, as well as China is open for 

further  cooperation  with  the  international  community  to  explore  the  region, 

develop its territories and protect its fragile ecosystem30. Moreover, the increased 

efforts of China in the Arctic region are beneficial for humankind, as the issue of 

ice melting in the Arctic is the litmus test for the global community to understand 

which  environmental  challenges  to  expect  in  the  future 31 .  Therefore,  the 

involvement of China in Arctic Affairs is perceived by the CCP representatives as 

an opportunity to contribute to the exploration of the region in order to develop the 

Arctic  deeper  and  more  comprehensively,  which  is  in  the  interests  of  the  whole 

global community. 

However, it is also implied that as a responsible power China not only has to 

protect  the  region,  but  also  to  safeguard  its  national  interests  in  the  Arctic  and 

promote international cooperation32. Therefore, for the representatives of the CCP, 

responsibility in the Arctic region implies responsibility towards the region and its 

stability  and  development  and  responsibility  towards  Chinese  national  interests 

which have to be protected by the PRC.  

Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from :https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2017-09/20/content_5226465.htm [国家海洋
局副局长解读《北极考察活动行政许可管理规定》] 
29 Ibid.  
30 Ibid. 
31  “State Oceanic Administration: frequency of China's Arctic scientific research increased to once a year” The 
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2017-10/10/content_5230819.htm [国家海洋局：我国北极科考频次增至每年一次] 
32 “Deputy Director General of the State Oceanic Administration explains the Regulations on the Administration of 
Administrative Licences for Arctic Expedition Activities” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 
Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2017-09/20/content_5226465.htm [国家海洋
局副局长解读《北极考察活动行政许可管理规定》] 

 
2.2.2. China as an Arctic stakeholder 

45 

By 2017 the idea of China being “Near-Arctic state” shifted to the concept 

of  “Arctic  stakeholder”(“利益攸关方”) 33,  which  has  a  broader  meaning,  making 

emphasis  not  only  on  the  geographical  position  of  China  which  could  be 

questioned by the Arctic states, but on capabilities of the PRC to be an influential 

actor in the region34. 

Such a concept leaves for China more opportunities to justify its presence in 

the  Arctic  region.  Therefore,  in  the  discourse  of  Chinese  officials  the  concept  of 

‘Arctic stakeholder’ is used to highlight that China has already achieved success in 

scientific  and  environmental  projects  in  the  region  and  aims  to  deepen  the 

development  of  the  region  by  increasing  its  efforts  and  cooperating  more  with 

other states35. 

The  concept  of  ‘Arctic  stakeholder’  was  also  developed  by  the  CCP  party 

members,  as  in  2017  it  was  outlined  that  the  ‘Arctic  stakeholder’  consists  of  3 

more  characteristics  of  Chinese  involvement  in  the  Arctic  region,  as  the  PRC  is 

also a ‘participant’ (‘参与者’), a ‘constructor’ (‘建设者’) and a ‘contributor’ (‘贡

献者’) in the Arctic affairs, which has both willingness and ability to take a larger 

role in the development of the Arctic region36. 

2.2.3.  Respect,  collaboration  and  win-win  cooperation  (“尊重、合作与

共赢”） 

The  principles  of  respect,  collaboration  and  win-win  cooperation  are  main 

concepts in the Arctic policy of China, which the PRC adhere to37. The concept of 

“respect” (“尊重”) implies that China respects the jurisdiction of Arctic states on 

33 Ibid. 
34 Ibid. 
35 Ibid. 
36  “Wang Yang Attends 4th International Arctic Forum” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of 
China, accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170330_340778.shtml [汪洋出席第四届国际北极论坛] 
37 “Statement by Minister Wang Yi at the Opening Ceremony of the Third Circumpolar Forum Assembly”  The 
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/vom/2015-10/19/content_2950053.htm [王毅部长在第三届北极圈论坛大会开幕
式上的致辞] 

 
46 

their territory and the sovereignty of their Arctic territories, as well as the interests 

and  rights  of  all  parties  involved,  including  Non-Arctic  states,  indigenous 

population of  the  region  and international  community38.   “Cooperation”  (“合作”) 

denotes as the main type of Chinese activity in the Arctic region, as the PRC tends 

to cooperate with Arctic states  in order to promote its projects on the territory of 

Arctics39.  What  is  more,  China  is  ready  to cooperate  not  only  with  Arctic  states, 

but  also  with  Non-Arctic  ones  and  other  interested  parties  in  any  field  of 

cooperation, 

including 

shipping, 

resource 

extraction, 

climate 

change, 

environmental protection and sustainable development40. The third concept is the 

‘win-win  cooperation’  (‘共赢’)  which  reflects  one  of  the  main  goals  of  Chinese 

participation in Arctic affairs, as China considers Arctic as a region which should 

be safe, sustainable and peaceful, which would benefit everyone, whereas negative 

drawback  of  violent  behavior  or  environmental  change  are  also  harmful  for 

everyone 41 .  Therefore,  the  PRC  calls  for  cooperation  in  the  Arctic  region  to 

achieve mutually beneficial goals. 

However,  in  2017  two  concepts  of  collaboration  and  win-win  cooperation 

were  merged  into  one  principle  of  collaboration,  whereas  the  new  concept  of 

sustainability  (可持续)  emerged 42.  Within  the  CCP  discourse  the  principle  of 

sustainability is about the necessity to find a balance between the development and 

protection of the Arctic region, as it is essential for the achievement of the long-

term goals of the Arctic development43. What is more, such balance is crucial for 

preservation of the environmental state of the region to attain peaceful coexistence 

between man and nature. 

38 Ibid. 
39 Ibid. 
40 Ibid. 
41 Ibid. 
42 “International Arctic Forum for Cooperative Development Concludes in Russia” The State Council of the 
People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2017-
03/31/content_5182371.htm [力主合作开发的国际北极论坛在俄闭幕] 
43 “Wang Yang: China's Participation in Arctic Affairs Based on Three Policy Concepts of Respect, Cooperation 
and Sustainability” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved 
from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170329_340758.shtml [汪洋：中国秉承尊重、合作、可持
续三大政策理念参与北极事务] 

 
47 

2.2.4. Chinese cooperation within the Arctic region 

The role of Arctic states, Near-Arctic states and the whole international 

system in Arctic affairs is an important part of the Chinese discourse on the Arctic 

region within the period of 2013-2017. In 2015 when the Vice-Minister of Foreign 

Affairs Zhang Ming outlined 6 main political concepts of Chinese actions in the 

Arctic region, where the four of them were dedicated to the attitude of China 

towards international cooperation44.The first concept highlights the necessity for 

“respect for the inalienable rights of Arctic States and Arctic Indigenous Peoples” 

(“尊重北极国家和北极土著人的固有权利”), which implies that China 

recognizes the sovereignty of the Arctic states and the rights and interests of 

indigenous people45. The next concept is about the “respect for the rights of 

extraterritorial Arctic states and the general interests of the international 

community” (“尊重北极域外国家的权利和国际社会的整体利益”), claiming 

that the international law granted extraterritorial states with the right to hold 

researches and navigation on the territory of the Arctic region46. Therefore, 

Chinese representatives of the CCP consider that such rights to be participate in 

Arctic affairs should be protected by the international community in order to 

secure the region and maintain the current pace of development47. The third 

concept promotes “the creation of a multi-level win-win structure for the 

cooperation in the Arctic region” (“构建以共赢为目标的多层次北极合作框架

”)48. The Chinese politicians speak about the fact that the Arctic region is crucial 

for the survival and development of mankind and therefore all states in the 

international community should cooperate within the Arctic region, creating a 

three-layer-system for communication on the national, regional and global levels49. 

44 “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 
45 Ibid. 
46 Ibid. 
47 Ibid. 
48 Ibid. 
49 Ibid. 

 
48 

During this time period the trilateral Arctic dialogue between China, Japan and 

South Korea started, confirming the fact that Chinese discourse is aligned with the 

Chinese Arctic policy50. The last concept on the Arctic cooperation outlines “the 

necessity to maintain the system of Arctic governance based on existing 

international law” (“维护以现有国际法为基础的北极治理体系”), as China 

considers the UN Charter, UNCLOS and the Svalbard treaty as a legal base for 

Arctic management, claiming that the system is sufficient enough to preserve it51. 

Thus, in the field of Arctic cooperation the PRC stands for global cooperation in 

various directions of Arctic affairs to maintain the stability and security in the 

region based on already existing mechanisms of governance. 

2.3. Community of Common Destiny for Mankind 

As the period of 2013-2017 started with President Xi coming to power, the 

general directions of Chinese foreign policy during that period also underwent 

significant changes. Therefore, some directions of foreign policy of China were 

interconnected due to the similarities in the discourse and decision-making process. 

The political concept of the “Community of Common Destiny for mankind” (“人

类命运共同体”) was promoted by Xi Jinping to foster global cooperation in 

international relations, as nowadays many challenges are global and therefore, they 

require global address52. The idea of the community with a shared future coincides 

with a trend on the joint Arctic development, which China promoted as a benefit 

for the global international community. Thus, the representatives of CCP in their 

speeches referred to the fact that the climate changes in the Arctic region that 

50 “Joint Statement of the Second Round of the China-Japan-Korea High-level Dialogue on Arctic Affairs” Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/wjbxw_673019/201706/t20170614_384812.shtml [第二轮中日韩北极事务高级别对话
联合声明] 
51 “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 
52 “Advocating and forging a community of human destiny - A review of diplomacy since the 18th National 
Congress” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 17, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2013-12/15/content_2548061.htm [倡导和打造人类命运共同体—十八大以来外交述评] 

 
 
49 

happened in recent years not only affect the climate in other states but also affect 

their economic development, as it has direct influence in production, agriculture 

and the possibility of prevention of probable disasters, making the Arctic region 

one of the main factors in further global development53.  Moreover, the concept of 

China being a “responsible great power” (“负责任大国”) can contribute to more 

comprehensive understanding and exploration of the Arctic region54, which benefit 

to the whole international society also correspond with the community with a 

shared future, which imply joint communication and management of issues, which 

are crucial for the international community. Another important issue that the 

representatives of the CCP refer to is globalization, as due to the process of 

globalization such issues as the development and security of the Arctic region as 

well as the problem of climate change are becoming important to everyone, 

making international cooperation the best outcome55. The concept of “win-win 

cooperation” (“共赢”) on the territory of the Arctic region could also be 

considered as a part of a discourse on Community of Common Destiny for 

Mankind, as the idea that for the international society it is more beneficial to 

preserve safe and stable Arctic, as its further development is in the interest for 

mankind56. Therefore, it could be concluded that the idea of the Arctic region being 

a common territory proclaimed by many CCP representatives could be considered 

as a continuation of the concept of ‘Community of Common Destiny for 

Mankind’.  

53  “Deputy Director General of the State Oceanic Administration explains the Regulations on the Administration of 
Administrative Licences for Arctic Expedition Activities” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 
Accessed April 17, 2025 Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2017-09/20/content_5226465.htm [国家海洋
局副局长解读《北极考察活动行政许可管理规定》] 
54 “State Oceanic Administration: frequency of China's Arctic scientific research increased to once a year” The 
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2017-10/10/content_5230819.htm [国家海洋局：我国北极科考频次增至每年一次] 
55 “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 
56 “Statement by Minister Wang Yi at the Opening Ceremony of the Third Circumpolar Forum Assembly”  The 
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/vom/2015-10/19/content_2950053.htm [王毅部长在第三届北极圈论坛大会开幕
式上的致辞] 

 
2.4. Environmental protection and climate change 

50 

For  representatives  of  the  CCP  the  issue  of  preservation  of  the  Arctic 

environment  is  crucial  for  the  security  of  China,  as  negative  drawbacks  of  the 

ecological situation in the Arctic would eventually impact the stability and security 

in  the  PRC.  Therefore,  two  of  Chinese  political  concepts  on  its  activities  in  the 

Arctic region, which were proclaimed in 2015 are dedicated to the environmental 

aspect of the Arctics57. The first concept is about “the necessity to advance Arctic 

research  and  knowledge”  (“推进探索和认知北极”),  claiming  that  the  Arctic 

region  is  an  experimental  zone  for  all  research  expedition  and  the  region  where 

climate change is most visible, therefore the CCP politicians promote the idea to 

create a common base for the utilization and protection of the Arctic region, which 

would  benefit  for  all  the  states58.  Another  concept  advocates  for  “the  protection 

and sustainable use of the Arctic and promotion of Arctic research and knowledge” 

(“倡导保护与合理利用北极推进探索和认知北极”)59,  as despite the fact that the 

Arctic  region  has  a  large  amount  of  resources  and  maritime  routes  essential  for 

shipping,  its  ecosystem  requires  considerable  protection  from  the  international 

society.  Therefore,  the  CCP  policymakers  stand  for  a  balanced  attitude  towards 

rational utilization of the region and its protection60.  

In 2017 the attitude of China towards the ecological agenda became an even 

more important part of the Arctic discourse, as the Vice Premier of the PRC Wang 

Yang  claimed  that  ecology  protection  should  be  a  priority  for  China  and  other 

states61, and thus China is ready to increase its participation in every direction of its 

activities in the region, as well as to take part in the development of institutional 

57 “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the 
Third Circumpolar Forum General Assembly” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 
accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_7945486.shtml [外交部副部长张
明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国国别专题会议上的主旨发言] 
58 Ibid. 
59 Ibid.  
60 Ibid.  
61  “Wang Yang: Working together to create a bright new future for the Arctic” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170329_340761.shtml [汪洋：共同开创北极美好新未来] 

 
mechanisms of Arctic governance, as China stands for ‘peaceful utilization of the 

51 

Arctic region’ (‘和平利用北极’)62.  

2.5. Chapter conclusion  

In conclusion, the analysis of the Chinese Communist Party representatives 

discourse on Arctic affairs within the period of 2013-2017 has revealed that China 

maintained its adherence to main principles of its activities in the region, such as 

its  adherence  to  international  law,  agreements  between  states  and  recognition  of 

sovereign rights of Arctic states on their territory. Moreover, the concept of ‘Near-

Arctic state’ which was used before the period of 2013-2017 has evolved into the 

notion of the PRC as an ‘Arctic stakeholder’, giving China more  opportunities to 

justify and increase its participation in Arctic affairs.  

After president Xi came to power his administration has shifted to more 

active promotion of joint usage of the Arctic region based on the principles of 

cooperation, respect and achievement of win-win outcomes for all actors in the 

international community. The Chinese discourse on the Arctic region is also 

aligned with the conception of Community of Common Destiny for Mankind, thus 

framing Arctic activities as mutually beneficial maintenance of peace and stability 

in the Arctic together with development of the region. Another important issue 

within the Arctic discourse of China is protection of the Arctic environment which 

should be implemented by all actors in the international community, as climate 

change in the Arctic region directly affects the stability and development of other 

regions of the world. The concept of China as a ‘responsible great power’ which 

emerged during that period also shows how China started to use its position in the 

region and financial capabilities as a legitimization and explanation of the 

necessity to be an Arctic player. The discourse of CCP representatives also shifted 

from bilateral projects with Arctic states to the growing importance of multi-layer 

cooperation both with Arctic states and Non-Arctic ones, thus promoting more 

inclusive form of Arctic governance, which would provide China with more 

opportunities to fulfill its interests in the region which include the development of 

62 Ibid.  

 
52 

maritime routes and resource exploration and extraction. Therefore, within the 

period of 2013-2017 the discourse of CCP representatives on Arctic affairs became 

more diversified, shifting to new areas of cooperation and aiming to assert its 

position in the region.  

 
 
Chapter 3 The Chinese discourse on Arctic affairs within the period of 

53 

2018-2024 

Introduction 

Chapter 3 provides the analysis of the discourse of CCP representatives on 

Arctic  affairs  within  the  period  of  2018-2024  based  on  statements,  speeches  and 

interviews published by the Government of China, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

and  Xinhua  News  Agency.  This  study  outlines  major  aspects  of  Chinese  Arctic 

policy  which  are  compliance  with  previous  Arctic  policies,  changes  in  the 

discourse within the administration of president Xi, the creation of White paper on 

the Arctic region, the  promotion of the Belt and Road initiative, and the issue of 

security.  

3.1. Compliance with direction of the discourse of CCP representatives 

on Arctic affairs before 2013 

This part of the chapter analyses the compliance of the discourse within the 

period of 2018-1014 with main directions of the discourse before 2013 and within 

the  period  of  2013-2017.  Similar  to  chapter  2,  chapter  3  studies  the  presence  of 

such  aspects  as  Chinese  adherence  to  international  norms  and  participation  in 

international  organizations,  its  support  of  sovereignty  and  interests  of  the  Arctic 

state and the concept of ‘Near-Arctic state’ in the discourse of CCP representatives. 

3.1.1.  China as a good party to international treaties and organizations 

During 2018-2024 the PRC continued to create the vision of China as a 

faithful party of international treaties and organizations, to maintain and increase 

the perception of the PRC as an Arctic player. Thus, Chinese politicians claim that 

faithful cooperation with all interested parties is an effective way of 

communication within the Arctic discourse63, putting emphasis on the maintenance 

of China-Nordic Arctic Cooperation Seminars (中国北欧北极合作研讨会)64 to 

highlight the level of cooperation with Arctic states and mentioning Congress of 

63  “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers 
reporters' questions.” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_9870161.shtml [外交
部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者提问实录] 
64 Ibid. 

 
54 

the World's Reindeer Breeders (世界驯鹿养殖者代表大会)65 to show good 

relations between China and indigenous Arctic population.  

Still, in 2018-2024 the discourse of CCP representatives faced a shift 

towards bilateral cooperation with the Arctic states, especially with Russia. 

Establishment of bilateral agreements and joint projects, such as “Yamal LNG” (亚

马尔 LNG)  are used as good examples of cooperation in the Arctic region by 

Chinese politicians66.  

Moreover, the idea of the creation of multilayer system of Arctic 

governance, which consists of national, regional and global layers, which was 

discussed in chapter 2 was continued by Chinese politicians, as they proceed with 

referring to the trilateral dialogue between China, South Korea and Japan67, 

considering it as a good example of regional dialogue on Arctic affairs, which is 

effective in enhancing the level of cooperation between 3 states68. Also, in the 

sphere of environmental protection, China continued to adhere to international 

treaties, thus, not only claiming that environmental issue remains an important part 

of Chinese Arctic policy, but also put an emphasis on the fact that Chinese 

principles of adherence to international law remain relevant for the state. Hence, 

the CCP policymakers claim that the PRC follows the principles of the Paris 

Agreement to preserve the Arctic ecosystem and conservative its species69. Thus, 

the representatives of the Chinese Communist Party still highlight that China is an 

important and trustful partner within the framework of Arctic governance.  

3.1.2. China as a supporter of preserving the sovereignty and interests 

of Arctic states 

The emphasis on the recognition of the interests of the Arctic states and the 

sovereignty of their Arctic territories remains an important aspect of Chinese 

discourse. The chapter 2 of this study provided the information that as in 2013-

2017 China started to broaden this concept, by outlining that the PRC also respects 

65 Ibid. 
66 Ibid. 
67 Ibid. 
68 Ibid. 
69 Ibid. 

 
55 

the interests of indigenous Arctic population, non-Arctic states and other interested 

parties and China is open for further cooperation. Therefore, during the period of 

2018-2024 the CCP representatives continued to proclaim that China supports and 

respects the rights of all the parties involved in Arctic affairs, as in 2018 the 

Chinese politicians highlighted that China still adheres to the principles of Arctic 

security and cooperation in the Arctic region70. The issue of Arctic security implies 

that the PRC aims to strengthen the protection of the Arctic region in different 

spheres, including climate change, protection of natural environment, as well as the 

CCP representatives highlight that the PRC respects culture, interests and rights of 

the indigenous population of the Arctic region71. The cooperation covers the 

necessity to continue and enhance the level of cooperation with all parties involved 

on the mutually beneficial basis72. Therefore, the positioning of China as a state 

which respects the rights and interests of its counterparts remains an important 

aspect of its Arctic discourse in the period of 2018-2024.  

3.1.3. China as a Near-Arctic state 

Within  the  period  of  2018-2024  the  PRC  has  shifted  from  the  concept  of 

‘Near-Arctic state’ (‘近北极国家’) to the idea of China being ‘Arctic stakeholder’ 

(‘ 利 益 攸 关 方 ’),  which  provides  more  comprehensive  definition  of  Chinese 

abilities in the region. Thus, one of the last mentionings of the concept of  ‘Near-

Arctic  state’  was  in  2018,  when  the  right  of  China  to  participate  in  the  Arctica 

affairs was, among other things, explained by its geographical position73.  

3.2. Chinese White Paper on the Arctic 

In 2018 the PRC published its first White Paper on the Arctic region, which 

became the first official guideline for Chinese Arctic policy74. Therefore, the White 

Paper is an important part of CCP representatives' discourse on the Arctic region. It 

70 Ibid. 
71 Ibid. 
72 Ibid. 
73 Ibid. 
74 “The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement on the State New Office "China's Arctic Policy" White Paper 
and other questions and answers” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 18, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-01/26/content_5261152.htm [外交部就国新办发表《中国的北
极政策》白皮书等答问] 

 
56 

was stated, that the publication of such document in 2018 is not a coincidence, as 

since  1990s  the  PRC  was  gradually  deepening  its  integration  into  the  system  of 

Arctic  governance  and  therefore, by 2018  China  accumulated enough  knowledge 

and power to clarify and generalize its Arctic policies, as other Non-Arctic states 

like the UK, Japan and South Korea already did75.  Thus, the official representative 

of Chinese MFA uses the idiom ‘水到渠成’ to outline, that 2018 was the best time 

for China to take more active position in the Arctic region76.  

Through  the  discourse  on  the  White  Paper  on  the  Arctic  region,  the  CCP 

representatives start to highlight that the PRC is the ‘Arctic stakeholder’ (‘北极事

务的重要利益攸关方’), shifting from the concept of ‘Near-Arctic state’ (‘近北极

国’) in the official discourse77. Moreover, the Chinese politicians started to refer to 

4  main  principles  of  Chinese  decision-making  in  the  Arctic  region,  which  are: 

‘clear  position’  (‘明确定位’), ‘explanation  of  propositions’  (‘阐释主张’),  ‘goals 

setting’ (‘设定目标’), ‘principles adherence’ ('坚持原则’)78.  

Thus, ‘clear positioning’ implies that the PRC positions itself as the ‘Arctic 

stakeholder’ and this identity perceived by China reflects its Arctic policies79. The 

principle of ‘explanation of propositions’ implies that China has 5 main political 

suggestions on further Arctic management which affect its behavior in the region80. 

These suggestions are: “First, continuously deepen the exploration and awareness 

of the Arctic; second, protect the Arctic ecological environment and respond to 

climate change; third, rationally use Arctic resources in accordance with the law; 

fourth, actively participate in Arctic governance and international cooperation; 

fifth, promote Arctic peace and stability”81. The next principle of ‘goals setting’ 

75 Ibid. 
76 Ibid.  
77 “Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Kong Xuanyou attended the press conference of the White Paper "China's 
Arctic Policy” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 18, 2025, Retrieved 
from: https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/wjbxw_673019/201801/t20180126_386029.shtml [外交部副部长孔铉佑出席
《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会] 
78 Ibid. 
79 Ibid.  
80 Ibid. 
81 Ibid. 

 
57 

denotes main directions of Chinese Arctic policies, which aimed “to understand the 

Arctic, to protect the Arctic, to use the Arctic and to participate in the Arctic 

management”82. The last principle is about ‘adherence to the principles’ of ‘respect’ 

(‘尊重’ 83), ‘collaboration’ (‘合作’ 84), ‘win-win cooperation’ ('共赢’ 85) and 

‘sustainability’ ('可持续’ 86).  Hence, during the period of 2018-2024 the 

representatives of Chinese Communist Party highlighted that the principle of 

‘respect’ ('尊重’) represents the respect of rights and interests of all parties 

involved in Arctic affairs87. The principle of ‘collaboration’ ('合作’) implies the 

ambitions to establish comprehensive relations with Arctic players on a multiple 

scale88. The ‘win-win cooperation’ ('共赢’) implies the aim to establish mutually 

beneficial relations between all interested parties striving for harmony in all the 

directions of Arctic activities89. The principle of ‘sustainability’ ('可持续’) denotes 

environmental protection assistance and sustainable use of resources and 

development of the Arctic region90. Therefore, the fact that in 2018 the CCP 

representatives use four principles instead of merging collaboration and win-win 

cooperation into one, as it was discussed in chapter 2, marks the change in the CCP 

Arctic discourse. 

3.3. The Belt and Road initiative 

The  Belt  and  Road  initiative  (一带一路)  became  an  important  part  of  the 

CCP  representatives’  discourse  on  Arctic  affairs.  As  the  initiative  proved  its 

efficiency,  Chinese  politicians  started  to  consider  it  as  one  of  the  most  effective 

systems  to  improve  global  governance  and  create  a  new  model  of  international 

cooperation 91.  Thus,  this  part  of  the  chapter  3  analyzes  the  discourse  of  CCP 

82 Ibid.  
83 Ibid. 
84 Ibid. 
85 Ibid. 
86 Ibid. 
87 Ibid.  
88 Ibid. 
89 Ibid. 
90 Ibid. 
91 “The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement on the State New Office "China's Arctic Policy" White Paper 
and other questions and answers” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 

 
representatives  on  the  issue  of  developing  BRI  initiative  in  the  Arctic  region, 

covering  aspects  of  the  cooperation  between  Russia  and  China  and  the 

58 

establishment of the Polar Silk Road (冰上丝绸之路). 

3.3.1. China-Russia cooperation 

The cooperation between China and Russia in the Arctic region remains an 

important  aspect  of  Chinese  Arctic  policy  and  the  development  of  the  BRI 

initiative. The representatives of the Chinese Communist Party consider Russia as 

a  great  Arctic  power  (北极大国)  which  has  a  great  influence  on  the  process  of 

Arctic management92.  Thus, the PRC representatives often refer to the successful 

long-term cooperation between the two states in the Arctic region, highlighting that 

the PRC is ready to  deepen the multidimensional cooperation with Russia on the 

basis of Sino-Russian Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (中俄全面战略合作伙

伴关系)93.  Moreover, the representatives of the CCP often refer to such issues as 

climate change and ice melting to highlight the importance of the Arctic sea Routes 

in international trade and transportation94. Thus, the PRC representatives claim that 

China  is  willing  to  assist  Arctic  states  in  the  development  of  their  sea  ports, 

infrastructure  and  maritime  science,  on  condition  that  the  Arctic  states  would 

govern their Arctic territories based on the international law, thus guaranteeing to 

other Arctic players like China the right to use and pass  through  their  Arctic  sea 

routes95. Also, Li Keqiang claimed that further development of the BRI initiative is 

deeply  connected  with  Sino-Russian  relations,  as  Russia  and  the  Eurasian 

Economic Union are considered as main actors in further development of the Belt 

Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-01/26/content_5261152.htm [外交部就国新办发表《中国的北
极政策》白皮书等答问] 
92  “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers 
reporters' questions.” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_9870161.shtml [外交
部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者提问实录] 
93 Ibid. 
94 Ibid. 
95 Ibid. 

 
59 

and  Road  Initiative96.  Therefore,  further  cooperation  with  Russia  is  essential  for 

China for further development of the Arctic model of BRI.  

By  2024  the  process  of  deepening  the  cooperation  in  the  Arctic  region 

started and in 2024 China and Russia established “Arctic Express No. 1” logistics 

train  to  connect  the  Russian  port  of  Arkhangelsk  and  Chinese  ports,  thus 

significantly reducing the time expenditure and transportation cost97. The Chinese 

Ambassador to Russia Zhang Hanhui noted that such transportation improvement 

would benefit  not  only to  the fields of transportation  and  logistics but  also to  all 

other  types  of  Comprehensive  Strategic  Partnership  including  trade,  investments 

and technological innovations98.  

3.3.2. Polar Silk Road 

The  growing  influence  of  China  in  the  Arctic  region  allowed  the  PRC  to 

start  more  active  promotion  of  the  Belt  and  Road  initiative.  Thus,  the  CCP 

policymakers  claim,  that  the  proximity  to  the  Arctic  circle  does  not  limit  state’s 

ability  to  participate  in  the  Arctic  affairs99,  and  as  the  PRC  is  already  the  Arctic 

stakeholder with a history of involvement in the Arctic governance, China aims to 

‘bring Chinese wisdom and strength to the sustainable development of the Arctic 

region’100. Therefore, together with Arctic states, China aims to create ‘Polar Silk 

Road’  (‘冰上丝绸之路’)  which  would  operate  for  the  benefit  of  the  common 

future and sustainable development of the Arctic region101.  

The  name  of  the  ‘Polar  Silk  Road’  also  undergone  some  changes  within 

recent years, as in 2017 President Xi used the name ‘Polar Silk Road’(‘冰上丝绸

96 “Li Keqiang's written interview with Russia's TASS news agency (full text)”The State Council of the People’s 
Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/2019-
09/16/content_5430056.htm [李克强接受俄罗斯塔斯社书面采访（全文)] 
97 “The first ‘Arctic Express 1’ logistics train started in Russia” The State Council of the People’s Republic of 
China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from:https://www.gov.cn/yaowen/liebiao/202407/content_6961713.htm [
首列“北极快线 1 号”物流专列在俄开行] 
98 Ibid.  
99 “China Sub-Forum of the Arctic Circle Forum held in Shanghai” The State Council of the People’s Republic of 
China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/14/content_5391336.htm [北
极圈论坛中国分论坛在上海举行] 
100 Ibid. 
101 Ibid. 

 
60 

之路’)102  whereas  in  the  official  White  Paper  on  the  Arctic  policy  the  name  of 

‘Silk  Road  in  the  Arctic’  (‘北极的“丝绸之路”’)  was  used103.  However,  the  Vice 

Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou explained that BRI is a general programme that 

China conducts on the territory of various regions, being ready to cooperate with 

any  state,  whereas  ‘Polar  Silk  Road’  is  a  part  of  the  general  Belt  and  Road 

Initiative,  conducted  by  China  and  Russia  aimed  for  the  development  and 

utilization  of  Arctic  sea  routes104.  Therefore,  within  the  period  of  2018-2024  the 

promotion and development of ‘Polar Silk Road’ was an important part of Chinese 

discourse on the Arctic affair, as further integration of ‘Polar Silk Road’ into BRI 

and  its  development  would  allow  China  to  increase  its  presence  in  the  Arctic 

region,  improve  the  relations  with  Arctic  states  by  holding  joint  projects  to 

improve  the  infrastructure  of  their  Arctic  territories  and  increase  trade  volume 

through new transportation routes. 

3.4. Perception of Arctic policies by president Xi administration 

This study proceeds with an overview of main features of the discourse of 

CCP  representatives  on  Arctic  affairs  within  the  period  of  2018-2024,  which  are 

depicted on the figure 2.  

Discourse topic  

Year  Author 

Main features 

Principles of ‘not to 

2018  Kong Xuanyou, 

1. 

 China is a non-

go overboard and 

Vice Foreign 

aggressive state, with no 

not to be absent’ 

Minister of the 

ambitions to take dominant 

PRC 

position in the region 

2. 

  China is ready to 

cooperate on the basis of 

international law 

102 “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers 
reporters' questions.” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_9870161.shtml [外交
部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者提问实录] 
103 Ibid.  
104 Ibid.  

 
61 

3. 

China is not interested 

in interfering in domestic 

affairs of Arctic state or in 

inter- state conflicts in the 

Arctic 

4. 

China is an ‘Arctic 

stakeholder’ which has to be 

presented in the region  

Protection of the 

2018  Kong Xuanyou, 

1. 

China stands for 

Arctic governance 

Vice Foreign 

protection of Arctic 

system 

Minister of the 

governance system based on 

PRC 

international law and legal 

treaties 

Respect of the 

2018  Kong Xuanyou, 

1. 

 China stands for respect 

Arctic governance 

Vice Foreign 

of already existing 

system 

Minister of the 

mechanisms of Arctic 

PRC 

governance  

Development of the 

2018  Kong Xuanyou, 

1. 

China supports the 

Arctic governance 

Vice Foreign 

development of Arctic 

system 

Minister of the 

governance system with 

PRC 

demands of times  

Securitization of the 

2018  Kong Xuanyou, 

1. 

China is not an 

Arctic region 

Vice Foreign 

aggressor and does not have 

Minister of the 

hidden ambitions in the region 

PRC 

2. 

   China calls for all 

states to comply with 

international law in order to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 

preserve Arctic ecosystem and 

population 

3. 

   China is a powerful 

state, capable of participation 

in Arctic affairs and 

coordinating other states 

4. 

 Unlike the US, which 

withdrew from Paris 

Agreement, China aims to 

preserve Arctic ecosystem.  

 Therefore,  within  the  period  of  2018-2024  the  principle  of  ‘not  going 

overboard and not being absent’105proclaimed by the Vice Foreign Minister of the 

PRC  Kong  Xuanyou  implies  that  China  does  not  aim  to  interfere  in  domestic 

affairs of Arctic states and does not have intentions to take the dominant position 

in  the  region.  On  the  contrary,  China  is  ready  for  cooperation  with  all  interested 

parties on the basis of international law, and as an ‘Arctic stakeholder’ has its own 

interests and responsibilities in the region106. What is more, the idea of the Arctic 

governance  system  protection  is  about  the  fact  that  China  supports  the  existing 

mechanisms of Arctic governance which are based on international law and legal 

treaties  and  aims  to  preserve  this  system107.  What  is  more,  the  respect  of  Arctic 

governance  system  implies  the  support  and  respect  towards  existing  mechanisms 

of governance108. Therefore, the CCP representatives stand for the idea of further 

development of such mechanism in order to adjust them to the modern politics109. 

Another important point in CCP representatives’ discourse on Arctic affairs is the 

105  “Foreign Ministry responds to U.S. accusation of China's participation in Arctic affairs: China does not overstep 
its bounds, does not lack position” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 
Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/07/content_5389492.htm [外交部回应美方指责中国参与北
极事务：中方不越位、不缺位] 
106 Ibid.  
107 Ibid.  
108 Ibid. 
109 Ibid.  

 
 
 
63 

issue  of  securitization  in  the  region,  as  the  Chinese  representative  claimed  that 

China  has  no  hidden  ambitions  and  clearly  positions  its  goals  in  the  region, 

stressing  that  its  actions  always  comply  with  international  law.  Thus,  addressing 

accusations  from  the  US  officials,  the  Vice  Foreign  Minister  of  the  PRC  Kong 

Xuanyou  stressed  that  China  is  a  supporter  of  international  treaties  such  as  the 

Paris  Agreement  and  thus  China  faithfully  adheres  to  its  principles  unlike  states 

like the US who withdrew from the treaty110. Moreover, CCP representatives stated 

that  China  has  enough  power  and  capabilities  to  be  presented  in  the  region  and 

participate  in  its  affairs,  thus  promoting  regional  development  and  reservation  of 

its ecosystem111.  

Therefore, the study proceeds with a more detailed analysis of each direction 

of CCP representatives' discourse on Arctic affairs within the period of 2018-

2024.  

3.4.1. Principles of ‘not to go overboard and not to be absent’(‘不越位、

不缺位’112) 

During the period of 2018-2024 the Chinese government aimed to continue 

already existing policies of deepening its presence in the Arctic region. Therefore, 

in 2018 the Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou outlined that the PRC positions 

itself as a ‘significant Arctic stakeholder’ (‘重要利益攸关方’113) which adhere to 

the two main principles of its presence in the Arctic region, where the first one is 

‘not to go overboard’ (‘不越位’114) and the second one is ‘not to be absent’(‘不缺

位’115).  Using  the  first principle, the  PRC  representatives highlight,  that  China  is 

not interested in affairs that happen only between Arctic states and affect only their 

interests,  as  well  as  China  does  not  have  any  intentions  of  taking  the  dominant 

110 Ibid.  
111 Ibid. 
112 Ibid.  
113 “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers 
reporters' questions.” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_9870161.shtml [外交
部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者提问实录] 
114 Ibid.  
115 Ibid.  

 
64 

position  in  the  region 116 .  Therefore,  such  a  principle  could  underline  the 

willingness  of  China  to  operate  on  the  basis  of  international  law  and  an  already 

established  institutional  framework.  The  second  principle  of  being  non-absent  in 

the  region  could  be  considered  as  an  attempt  of  China  to  claim  their  right  on 

participating in arctic affairs, based on their perception of the PRC as the ‘Arctic 

stakeholder’  with  geographical  proximity  to  the  region  and  global  and  national 

interests  in  the  region 117.  Hence,  the  CCP  representatives’  discourse  on  Arctic 

affairs is shaped around the idea of representing rights and interests of the PRC in 

the region, including their bilateral projects with Arctic states, interests in logistics 

and transportation as well as scientific research.  

The necessity of China to promote the vision of the PRC as a non-aggressive 

Arctic player is one of the most important aspects of the discourse on Arctic affairs 

within  the  given  period,  as  China  has  to  prove  its  non-aggressive  behaviour  to 

other  Arctic  states  in  order  to  proceed  with  already  existing  policies  and  project 

and to deepen the level of participation in regional affairs. As the US remains the 

state  with  most  suspicious  attitude  towards  Chinese  desire  to  gain  control  of  the 

region, the PRC has to react to such accusations, thus not only to maintain relations 

with the US, but also to keep the relations with European states, such as Finland, 

Norway  and  the  Denmark  which  policies  are  directly  affected  by  their  relations 

with  the  US,  as  it  was  described  in  chapter  1.  Therefore,  in  response  to  the 

American criticism on Chinese unclear ambitions in the Arctic region, the Foreign 

Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang noted that China is interested in trans-regional 

and  global  issues  only,  having  no  intentions  to  intervene  into  bilateral  relations 

between Arctic states118. Moreover, the representative marked the increasing trend 

of China to participate in activities dedicated to the issues of peace and cooperation 

in the region, not in geopolitical rivalry between Arctic states119. Thus, the idea of 

116 Ibid.  
117 Ibid.  
118 “Foreign Ministry responds to U.S. accusation of China's participation in Arctic affairs: China does not overstep 
its bounds, does not lack position” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 
Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/07/content_5389492.htm [外交部回应美方指责中国参与北
极事务：中方不越位、不缺位] 
119 Ibid.  

 
65 

possible threats and opportunities that emerge in the Arctic and are important to the 

global community is still used in the Arctic discourse of the CCP representatives to 

show peaceful identity of the Chinese policies in the Arctic region, which aimed at 

achieving mutually beneficial outcomes.   

3.4.2. Chinese position on Arctic governance  

Within  the  period  of  2018-2024  China  aimed  to  engage  in  the  process  of 

Arctic governance in order to be perceived as an ‘Arctic stakeholder’ and promote 

Chinese  vision  of 

the  Arctic  governance.  Therefore, 

in  2018 

the  CCP 

representatives  outlined  3  main  directions  of  Arctic  governance,  which  are  most 

important for China120 These directions are ‘protection’ (‘维护’121), ‘respect’ (‘尊

重 ’ 122 )  and  ‘development’  (‘ 发 展 ’ 123 ).  The  ‘protection’  implies  protection  of 

already existing legal basis for Arctic governance, including the adherence to the 

Svalbard  treaty,  UNCLOS  and  UN  Charter124.   Hence,  the  CCP  representatives 

consider  that  the legal  framework  of  Arctic governance  is  efficient  enough  to  be 

maintained  and  protected  by  the  Chinese  side.  The  idea  of  ‘respect’  is  about  the 

respect  for  already  existing  mechanisms  of  Arctic  governance,  including 

international  organizations  on  the  regional,  national  and  global  levels,  as  such 

mechanisms provide a platform for mutual respect among Arctic players and create 

possibilities  for  further  cooperation125.  Thus,  for  China,  any  further  direction  of 

Arctic governance development should take  into account existing mechanisms of 

its  governance  in  order  to  preserve  the  instruments  which  allow  inclusive 

participation  of  all  the  actors.  By  the  concept  of  ‘development’  the  CCP 

representatives  mean  further  development  of  the  system  of  Arctic  government  in 

line with the demands of the times126. Hence, the mechanisms of Arctic governance 

120 “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers 
reporters' questions.” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_9870161.shtml [外交
部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者提问实录] 
121 Ibid. 
122 Ibid.  
123 Ibid.  
124 Ibid.  
125 Ibid.  
126 Ibid.  

 
66 

should  not  remain  unchanged  but  rather  be  adjusted  to  any  change,  making  the 

system less vulnerable in any sphere of activities in the Arctic.  

3.5. The issue of securitization within Arctic discourse 

The issue of securitization is an important area of the Arctic discourse within 

recent years. As it was analyzed in chapter 1, Arctic states perceive the Arctic 

region as a place where the process of securitization could drastically change the 

existing balance of power. The increasing role of China in the Arctic region allows 

Arctic states to question its real motives, thus starting to accuse China of having 

hidden intentions. Still, the PRC in its discourse aims to present its vision of the 

Arctic order, highlighting the peaceful role of China.    

To begin with, China categorises the security of the Arctic itself and its 

defence as a separate category. Regarding China's policy in the Arctic, Chinese 

representatives emphasise that China has no ulterior motives to build up its 

military power, thereby increasing its presence in the region, or to independently 

utilize resources that belong to the Arctic states127. Moreover, in the discourse of 

the Chinese Communist Party representatives, there is the idea that China does not 

act as an aggressor in the Arctic region, also stating the fact that Arctic states have 

a strong and reliable legal system that prevents aggressive behaviour by any other 

state128. Besides, China is always in favour of respecting the existing legal system, 

so the PRC believes that any company's activities should be conducted in 

accordance with the domestic jurisdiction of the Arctic country where the activities 

take place, international law and the domestic laws of the country where the 

company is registered129. The CCP representatives also claim that all actors in the 

Arctic have their own social obligations, according to which the rights of all those 

involved in Arctic projects and local populations must be strictly respected130.  

127 “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers 
reporters' questions.” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, accessed April 4, 2025, 
Retrieved from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_9870161.shtml [外交
部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者提问实录] 
128 Ibid.  
129 Ibid.  
130 Ibid.  

 
67 

Another important dimension of security issue is the ecological security of 

the Arctic, as in the discourse of the CCP representatives the issue of climate 

change and ecological protection is framed as global problem, which could be 

managed by the collective actions of all the states, thus making the perception of 

China as a powerful state, which has responsibility to address global threats and 

aim to coordinate cooperation between states131. Hence, in order to show peaceful 

nature of Chinese presence in the Arctic region, the CCP representatives claim that 

China put a lot of efforts in protecting Arctic ecosystem, unlike the US which 

withdrew from Paris Agreement132. This way, the CCP representatives respond to 

the accusations from the US politicians to highlight that nowadays China is aware 

of ecological problems and ready for cooperation to improve the situation thus 

achieving more beneficial outcomes for every state.  

3.6. Chapter conclusion  

During the period of 2018-2024, the main features of Chinese policy in the 

Arctic  region,  such  as  its  perception  of  sovereignty,  state’s  interests  and 

international  law  remained  in  the  discourse  of  CCP  representatives,  highlighting 

that such decision-making in the Arctic region could be considered as the founding 

principles of Chinese Arctic policy under the presidency of Xi Jinping.  Still, as the 

level of Chinese participation in Arctic affairs increased, the discourse around the 

role of China in the region and the justification of its ambitions changed from the 

idea  of  being  ‘Near-Arctic  state’  to  the  concept  of  the  ‘Arctic  stakeholder’,  thus 

providing  China  with  more  opportunities  for  further  development  of  its  Arctic 

strategy. The starting point of the discourse within this period is the publication of 

the official White Paper on the Arctic, which stressed main goals and principles of 

Chinese presence in the region to comprehensively participate in different areas of 

activities in the region, including exploration of the Arctic and its resources, joint 

131  “Ministry of Foreign Affairs: regrets failure to issue a common declaration at Arctic Council ministerial 
meeting” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/08/content_5389818.htm [外交部：对北极理事会部长级会议未能发表共同
宣言表示遗憾] 
132  Ibid.  

 
 
68 

projects  with  Arctic  states  aimed  to  develop  the  region  and  achieve  mutually 

beneficial  outcomes,  protection  of  the  environment,  indigenous  population  and 

preservation  of  already  existing  mechanisms  of  the  Arctic  governance.  The 

development  of  the  Belt  and  Road  initiative  and  the  creation  of  the  ‘Polar  Silk 

Road’ is another important aspect of the Chinese rhetoric on Arctic affairs and its 

bilateral  relations  with  Arctic  states,  especially  with  Russia.  References  to  the 

‘Polar Silk Road’ in the official discourse allowed China to merge it with the BRI 

initiative, thus increasing the level of importance of the ‘Polar Silk Road’ within 

Chinese Foreign policy and highlighting the role of China in the Arctic region as a 

player  with  long  and  consistent  history  of  involvement  in  Arctic  affairs.   The 

growing tension between China and the US on the role of the PRC in the Arctic 

was  also  a  part  of  the  discourse  within  the  given  period,  as  for  the  PRC  it  was 

essential to show the peaceful nature of its Arctic policies which is supported by 

previous periods of their involvement in Arctic affairs when CCP representatives 

did  not  show  any  intentions  to  dominate  in  the  region  and  due  to  the  founding 

principles of Chinese behaviour in the region, such as the achievement of win-win 

outcomes,  stress  on  respect  and  cooperation  in  order  to  sustainably  develop  the 

region. 

 
 
Conclusion  

69 

This study analyzed the transformation of the discourse of representatives of 

the Chinese Communist Party on the Arctic within the period of 2013-2024, 

studying main directions of the discourse and political priorities of China in the 

region. This work provides a following list of key outcomes to present the results:  

1) Since the involvement of China in Arctic affairs increased in the 1990s, 

the CCP representatives expressed its commitment to international law and its 

willingness to work within the already existing system of Arctic governance. 

Nevertheless, during the period of 2013-2024, in Chinese discourse emerged the 

call for improvement of governance mechanisms, which should be implemented by 

the entire international community on the basis of the already existing system.  

2) Despite the fact that China remains a supporter of the vision of the Arctic 

as a territory open for everyone, the CCP representatives' discourse always 

emphasises that the PRC recognises the exclusive rights and interests of the Arctic 

countries, as well as the rights of its indigenous people. However, during the 

period 2013-2024, this vision has changed, as it now goes hand in hand with the 

idea that CCP representatives also declares the respect of the rights and interests of 

non-Arctic states and all interested parties in the Arctic, thus showing openness for 

dialogue and cooperation with any party in the Arctic, thus expanding the list of 

possible partners.  

3) In the period of 2013-2024, China was still in the process of constructing 

its Arctic identity as it was undergoing significant changes, moving from a 'near-

Arctic state', to an 'Arctic stakeholder', which gives more options for its positioning 

in the region. And in 2018, China began to see itself as an ‘significant Arctic 

stakeholder’ which should not to overboard thus not seeking to dominate the 

region, recognising that Arctic countries have their own interests, but also should 

not be absent, as China has interests in the region, a history of involvement in 

Arctic affairs and the ability to continue that involvement, thus remaining an Arctic 

player.  

70 

4) After president Xi came to power, the concept of ‘responsible great power’ 

emerged to emphasise that the PRC is already part of the system of Arctic 

governance, as well as an influential player in the international system. Thus, 

China has a responsibility and a moral obligation to protect the Arctic region, 

which is crucial for the global security and the security of the PRC. Moreover, 

China also has to increase its presence in the region, as it is a great power which 

has to present in the Arctic and improve the level of its involvement in Arctic 

affairs.  

5) In the Arctic discourse, the PRC adheres to the principles of ‘respect, 

cooperation and mutual benefit’, which they refer to as the basis for their actions in 

the region. Nevertheless, these principles have also undergone significant changes 

as in 2017 the principles of cooperation and mutual benefit were merged into one, 

and ‘sustainability’ became the third principle of their Arctic policy. However, in 

the period of 2018-2024 the principles were modified, as the four principles were 

divided into separate ones. Therefore, the emphasis on the sustainability and 

ecological protection and the role of China in achieving these goals points to the 

increasing importance of these ideas in CPP representatives' Arctic discourse and 

Chinese Arctic policy.  

6) Also during Xi Jinping‘s presidency, the ideas of creation of a multi-level 

system of Arctic governance, with national, regional and global layers emerged in 

the Arctic discourse. Thus, throughout the study period CCP representatives 

highlighted the necessity to establish such a system, referring to the trilateral 

dialogue between China, Japan and South Korea, using it as an example of the 

regional platform for cooperation and decision-making on Arctic affairs.   

7) Moreover, the Arctic policy of China and its discourse are aligned with 

the concept of Community of Common Destiny for Mankind, which was also 

created by the administration of president Xi. The concept implies the increase in 

the level of cooperation among states for the good of the humankind, as nowadays 

due to globalization the society faces global challenges such as climate change and 

ice melting which should be managed by the whole international community, as 

71 

the possible drawbacks and benefits are also common. Within its Arctic discourse, 

the CCP representatives also highlight the importance of the involvement of all 

actors in the Arctic protection and development, claiming that such cooperation is 

mutually beneficial. Hence, this study outlines the connection between these two 

policies during the period of president Xi.  

8) Another important direction of Chinese Arctic discourse is the protection 

of the Arctic ecosystem. Therefore, the CCP representatives outline that the 

process of development and exploration of the Arctic region, as well as its 

protection both from ecological threats and human ones should be done by joint 

forces. Therefore, China stands for the fact that the Arctic must remain a peaceful 

region, with no military confrontations.  

9) In 2018 the Official White Paper on Chinese Arctic Policy was published 

to finalise the Arctic strategy of China to secure its status as an Arctic stakeholder. 

By publishing the White Paper the CCP representatives have also shown their 

openness for further dialogue with Arctic and Non-Arctic states based on the 

principles of mutually beneficial cooperation, readiness to explore and protect 

Arctic ecosystem as well as to operate in the region on the basis of international 

law. The publication of the White Paper also marked the willingness of the PRC to 

participate in the process of Arctic governance and be involved in the 

modernization of mechanisms of governance, thus promoting the necessity to 

maintain the Arctic as a peaceful and stable region.  

10) The Belt and Road Initiative also remains an important part of the 

Chinese discourse on Arctic affairs, as CCP representatives outline, that China is 

an Arctic stakeholder which has capabilities and obligations to use Chinese 

experience and competences to develop the Arctic region, being a supporter of the 

vision of Arctic as a peaceful and developed place. In Chinese discourse it is 

highlighted that Russia as a state which has large Arctic territories , including 

Northern Sea Route, which remains an integral part of the Chinese ‘Polar Silk 

Road’ remains the most important partner in the development of ‘Polar Silk Road’ 

despite the fact that both states have different approaches to the Arctic 

72 

management, where Russia does not share the Chinese vision of the Arctic and 

Northern Sea Route as a common territory, which is open for everyone. Thus, 

cooperation with Russia is essential for the PRC to promote the ‘Polar Silk Road’ 

on the basis of Sino-Russian Comprehensive Strategic Partnership.  

11) During the period of 2018-2024 a new direction emerged within the 

CCP representatives discourse on Arctic affairs, as it became essential to highlight 

that China is a non-aggressive state, which is not aimed to dominate in the Arctic 

region. Taking into account the fact that the US and its allies question the real 

ambitions of China in the region. Therefore, the CPC representatives emphasise 

that China does not interfere in the affairs of the Arctic states and is only interested 

in fighting global threats, as well as in cooperation aimed at achieving mutually 

beneficial outcomes. The CCP representatives also refer to Chinese integrity in 

respect to the implementation of the principles of international law, participation in 

international organisations and documents to show its peaceful identity, besides, 

making a contrast between the peaceful China that wants to achieve a mutually 

beneficial and peaceful coexistence in the Arctic and the USA that has withdrawn 

from the Paris Agreement, thus showing less intentions towards achieving stability 

and protection in the Arctic region.  

Limitations of the study 

One of the main limitations of this work is absence of the analysis of the 

discourse within non-CCP representatives, thus this work does not study the 

discourse within non-CCP representatives inside China and international responses 

to Chinese discourse. Moreover, this study lacks quantitative methodology, leaving 

no opportunity to quantify the frequency of each concept appearing within 

discourse of CCP representatives on Arctic affairs.  

Prospects for further research  

This study leaves room for further inclusion of the analysis of responses 

from the international community to Chinese position on Arctic affairs, thus 

providing a more comprehensive study of Chinese role within the framework of 

Arctic governance and Chinese activities in the region.  

73 

Another suggestion for further research is the study of the role of other non-

Arctic states, such as India and Brazil in the Arctic region, as within recent years 

these states also started to more actively pursue Arctic policy. The communication 

between China and other Non-Arctic states could also be a part of further analysis. 

What is more, it is suggested to analyze the role of international organizations, 

such as BRICS within the Arctic region, thus providing a more comprehensive 

study of current trends in Arctic management and the role of China in the region.   

 
 
Reference list   

74 

Bertelsen, R. G. (2025). Divided Arctic in a Divided World Order. Strategic 

Analysis, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1080/09700161.2025.2453322 

Bertelsen, R.G. (2022). Unipolarity and Order in the Arctic. In: Græger, N., 

Heurlin,  B.,  Wæver,  O.,  Wivel,  A.  (eds)  Polarity  in  International  Relations. 

Governance,  Security 

and  Development.  Palgrave  Macmillan,  Cham. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05505-8_16 

Bislev, A. K., Gad, U. P., & Zeuthen, J. W. (2018). China seeking Arctic 

Resources-The Arctic seeking resources in China. Arctic Yearbook, 2018. 

Browne, J., Coffey, B., Cook, K., Meiklejohn, S., & Palermo, C. (2019). A 

guide to policy analysis as a research method. Health promotion international, 

34(5), 1032-1044  

China Internet Information Center. (2008) “Joint Statement Between China 

and Denmark on Establishment of Comprehensive Strategic Parnership”. Accessed 

May 1, 2025. Retrieved from: http://www.china.org.cn/government/news/2008-

10/25/content_16664479.htm 

China-Nordic Arctic Research Center. “Nordic members”. (n.d.) Accessed 

May 1, 2025. Retrieved from: https://www.cnarc.info/members/nordic-members 

Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration. “About Us”. (n.d.) Accessed 

May 1, 2025. Retrieved 

from:https://web.archive.org/web/20100307224446/http://www.chinare.gov.cn/en/

index.html?pid=about 

Chircop, A. (2011). The emergence of China as a Polar-capable State. 

Canadian Naval Review, 7(1), 9-14.  

Conley, H. A., & Melino, M. (2021). America's Arctic moment: Great power 

competition in the Arctic to 2050. Rowman & Littlefield.. 

Cui Lung (2024). Exploration of the Arctic by Chinese scientists (historical 

aspect).  Russia 

in 

the  Global  World, 

27 

(1), 

140-153. 

doi: 

10.48612/rg/RGW.27.1.9 (In Russian) 

75 

Devyatkin, Pavel. (2024) "The Arctic Strategic Triangle: United States—

China—Russia Competition and Cooperation." China-Russia Relations in the 

Arctic: Friends in the Cold?. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. 57-79. 

Ding, Zhang (2016), ‘Pan-Arctic community vision and Chinese identity 

formation: a constructivist interpretation,’ Journal of Jiangsu Administrative 

College, Issue 4, 2016, pp. 76-83.[丁煌、张冲：《泛北极共同体的设想与中国

身份的塑造：一种建构主义的解读》，《江苏行政学院学报》 ２０１６年第

４期，第７６—８３页] (In Chinese) 

Ding, Zhao (2014) ‘Arctic governance and China's participation: an analysis 

based on international public goods theory’, Journal of Wuhan University 

(Philosophy and Social Sciences Edition), No. 3, 2014, pp. 39-44.  [丁煌、赵宁宁：

《北极治理与中国参与：基于国际公共品理论的分析》，《武汉大学学报》

（哲学社会科 学版）２０１４年第３期，第３９—４４页。 ] (In Chinese)  

Finnemore, M., & Sikkink, K. (2001). Taking stock: the constructivist 

research program in international relations and comparative politics. Annual review 

of political science, 4(1), 391-416. 

Galimullin Eduard Zulfatovich, Vasily Borisovich Kashin, & Anastasia 

Sergeevna Kramarenko (2024). Snow Dragon: China's Arctic policy in the face of 

new challenges. Bulletin of the Peoples' Friendship University of Russia. Series: 

International relations, 24 (3), 358-370. doi: 10.22363/2313-0660-2024-24-3-358-

370 (In Russian) 

Government of Iceland. (2013) “Free Trade Agreement between Iceland and 

China”. Accessed May 1. Retrieved from: 

https://www.government.is/topics/foreign-affairs/external-trade/free-trade-

agreements/free-trade-agreement-between-iceland-and-china/  

Habermas,  J.  (2003).  The  Theory  Of  Communicative  Action  (Beacon  Press 

ed., Vol. 2). 

Hansen, L. (2013). Security as practice: discourse analysis and the Bosnian 

war. Routledge. 

Hastings, A. (1998). Connecting linguistic structures and social practices: a 

discursive approach to social policy analysis. Journal of Social Policy, 27(2), 191-

76 

211. 

Hastings, J. G. (2014). The rise of Asia in a changing Arctic: a view from 

Iceland. Polar Geography, 37(3), 215-233. 

Hopf,  T.  (1998).  The  promise  of  constructivism  in  international  relations 

theory. International security, 23(1), 171-200. 

Jepperson,  R.  L.,  Wendt,  A.,  &  Katzenstein,  P.  J.  (1996).  Norms,  identity, 

and  culture  in  national  security.  The  culture  of  national  security:  Norms  and 

identity in world politics, 33, 34. 

Karlusov, V. (2017). Arctic vector of China's globalisation. Arctic region: 

problems of international cooperation, 236. (In Russian) 

Kienko, E. V. (2019). International legal foundations of China's co-operation 

with the Arctic states. Journal of Foreign Legislation and Comparative Law, (2), 

64-68. (In Russian) 

Kienko, Elena V. (2019). “The international legal position of the PRC in 

relation to the Arctic Ocean regime” diss. ... candidate of jurisprudence, MGIMO 

of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia. (In Russian) 

Kobzeva, M. A. (2017). The Russian Component in China's Modern Arctic 

Policy. 

Koivurova,  T.,  Kauppila,  L.,  Kopra,  S.,  Lanteigne,  M.,  Shi,  M.,  Smieszek, 

M.,  ...  &  Nojonen,  M.  (2019).  China  in  the  Arctic  and  the  opportunities  and 

challenges for Chinese-Finnish Arctic co-operation. 

Kolzina, A. L., & Mindubaeva, A. A. (2020). ‘Polar Silk Road’ as a sphere 

of strategic partnership between the Russian Federation and the PRC. Bulletin of 

University of  Udmurtsk. Sociology. Politology. International relations, 4(2), 186-

195. (In Russian) 

Kopra & Puranen (2021) China’s Arctic Ambitions Face Increasing 

Headwinds in Finland URL: https://thediplomat.com/2021/03/chinas-arctic-

ambitions-face-increasing-headwinds-in-finland/ (date of reference: 01.04.2025) 

77 

Kopra, S. (2022). China and a New Order in the Arctic. In Power Transition 

in the Anarchical Society: Rising Powers, Institutional Change and the New World 

Order (pp. 309-327). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 

Kornev,  K.  (2022).  China's  Growing  Presence  in  the  Arctic  Region: 

Opportunities  and  Threats  for  Neighbouring  Countries.  Russian  Council  on 

Foreign 

Affairs:[website].-2022.-1 

Aug.-URL: 

https://russiancouncil.ru/blogs/kkornev/rastushchee-prisutstvie-knr-varkticheskom-

regione-vozmozhnosti-i-i-ugro/(date of reference: 17.03. 2025).(In Russian) 

Kratochwil,  F.  (2018).  Praxis:  On  acting  and  knowing.  Cambridge 

University Press. 

Kristeva, Julia (1980). Desire in language: a semiotic approach to literature 

and art. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Kuang, C., & Ou, K. (2019). China's new Arctic policy. World Economy 

and International Relations, 63(7), 84-91. (In Russian) 

Kulintsev, Y. (2023). China's One Belt, One Road Initiative Decade: 

Challenges, Achievements and Prospects Russian International Affairs 

Council[site] URL: https://russiancouncil.ru/analytics-and-

comments/columns/postsoviet/desyatiletie-kitayskoy-initsiativy-odin-poyasa-odin-

put-vyzovy-dostizheniya-i-perspektivy/ (In Russian) 

Lackenbauer, W., & Manicom, J. (2013). Canada’s Northern strategy and 

East Asian interests in the Arctic. East Asia-Arctic relations: Boundary, security 

and international politics, 77-116. 

Laitin,  D.  D.  (1998).  Identity 

in 

formation:  The  Russian-speaking 

populations in the near abroad. Cornell University Press. 

Lanteigne, M., & Ping, S. (2015). China's developing Arctic policies: myths 

and misconceptions. Journal of China and International Relations, 3(1). 

Li Zhenfu,  Li Shiyue (2020). China's Research on Arctic Issues: 

Development Lineage, Support System and Discipline Development, Russian East 

European Central Asian Studies No. 5, 2020, pp. 113-158. [李振福 & 李诗悦：

78 

《中国北极问题研究：发展脉络、支撑体系和学科发展》，《俄罗斯东欧中

亚研究》2020 年第 5 期，第 113-158 页。] (In Chinese) 

Li,  N.  (2014).  China’s  evolving  naval  strategy  and  capabilities  in  the  Hu 

Jintao Era. Assessing the People’s Liberation Army in the Hu Jintao Era, 257-300. 

Li. (2015). Research on international co-operation mechanism for oil and 

gas resources development in the Arctic region. WU International Law Review (1), 

20.[李洁. (2015). 北极地区油气资源开发国际合作机制研究. 武大国际法评论

(1), 20.] (In Chinese) 

Liu, N. (2021). China and one hundred years of the Svalbard Treaty: Past, 

present and future. Marine Policy, 124, 104354. 

Lu, (2011) Analysing China's Strategic Interests in the Arctic: A Non-

traditional Security Perspective. Journal of Jiangnan University of Social Sciences, 

December 2011, Vol. 13, No. 4. Pages 1-5 [陆俊元(2011)中国在北极地区的战略

利益分析——非传统安全视角。江 南 社 会 学 院 学 报 2011 年 12 月第 13 

卷第 4 期。第 1-5 页] (In Chinese) 

Mehta А (2018). How A Potential Chinese-built Airport in Greenland Could 

Be Risky for a Vital US Air Force Base. — URL: 

https://www.defensenews.com/global/ europe/2018/09/07/how-a-potential-

chinese-builtairport-in-greenland-could-be-risky-for-a-vital-us-airforce-base/ (date 

of reference: 01.04.2025) 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2013) “Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei 

answers questions on the acceptance of China as an observer to the Arctic Council” 

[外交部发言人洪磊就北极理事会接受中国为观察员事答记者问]. Accessed 

April 4, 2025. Retrieved 

from:https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/fyrbt_673021/dhdw_673027/201305/t20130515_5

432938.shtml 

79 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2017) “Joint Statement of the Second Round of the 

China-Japan-Korea High-level Dialogue on Arctic Affairs” [第二轮中日韩北极事

务高级别对话联合声明]. Accessed April 4, 2025.  Retrieved from: 

https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/wjbxw_673019/201706/t20170614_384812.shtml 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2015) “Keynote address by Vice-Minister for Foreign 

Affairs Zhang Ming at the China country-specific session of the Third Circumpolar 

Forum General Assembly” [外交部副部长张明在“第三届北极圈论坛大会”中国

国别专题会议上的主旨发言]. Accessed April 4, 2025, Retrieved from: 

https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201510/t20151017_79

45486.shtml 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2018) “Vice Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou attends 

the press conference on ‘China's Arctic Policy’ and answers reporters' questions.” 

[外交部副部长孔铉佑出席《中国的北极政策》白皮书新闻发布会并回答记者

提问实录]. Accessed April 4, 2025. Retrieved from: 

https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/201801/t20180126_987

0161.shtml 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2017) “Wang Yang Attends 4th International Arctic 

Forum”[ 汪洋出席第四届国际北极论坛]. Accessed April 4, 2025. Retrieved 

from: https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170330_340778.shtml  

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2017) “Wang Yang: China's Participation in Arctic 

Affairs Based on Three Policy Concepts of Respect, Cooperation and 

Sustainability” [汪洋：中国秉承尊重、合作、可持续三大政策理念参与北极

事务]. Accessed April 4, 2025. Retrieved from: 

80 

https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170329_340758.shtml 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 

[中华人民共和国外交部]. (2017) “Wang Yang: Working together to create a 

bright new future for the Arctic”[ 汪洋：共同开创北极美好新未来]. Accessed 

April 4, 2025. Retrieved from: 

https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/zyxw/201703/t20170329_340761.shtml 

Nielsen, L. J. (2019). China's Pursuit of National Interests in the Arctic-An 

Examination of China's Geostrategic Investments in Iceland and Greenland. 

People’s daily[人民网] (2023) “Writing a New Chapter of Peaceful 

Development -- 10th Anniversary of President Xi Jinping's Concept of Building a 

Community of Human Destiny” [谱写和平发展新篇章——习近平主席提出构

建人类命运共同体理念十周年]. Accessed May 1, 2025, Retrieved from: 

http://politics.people.com.cn/n1/2023/0325/c1001-32651059.html 

Prime Minister’s Office (2013) Finland’s Strategy for the Arctic Region 

2013https://arcticandnorth.ru/Encyclopedia_Arctic/Encyclopedia_Finland_arctic_s

trategy_2013.pdf (date of reference: 01.04.2025) 

Rein, M. and Schön, D. T. (1993). Policy discourse. In Fisher, F. and 

Forester, J. (eds), The Argumentative Turn in Policy Analysis and Planning, pp. 

145–165. Duke University Press, Durham. 

Sheng, E. L. (2022). Arctic opportunities and challenges: China, Russia and 

the US cooperation and competition. 

Shuang, L. (2021). China's positioning in the Arctic: evolution of concepts 

and promotion mechanisms. Asia and the Pacific: economics, politics, law, 23(4), 

99-110. (In Russian) 

Strelnikova I.A. (2025). Arctic cooperation within BRICS in the context of 

its expansion and transformation of global governance for a changing world. 

Bulletin of International Organisations: Education, Science, New Economy, 20 (1), 

10. doi: 10.17323/1996-7845-2025-01-10 (In Russian) 

81 

Strelnikova Irina Alexandrovna, Kharina Olga Alexandrovna, & Nabiev 

Khusravkhon Khurshedovich (2024). Key interests of China and India in the Arctic 

and main directions for co-operation with Russia. Analyses and forecasts. Journal 

of IMEMO RAS, (2), 72-83. doi: 10.20542/afij-2024-2-72-83 (In Russian) 

Suslov, D., & Kashin, V. (2022). Arctic as a New Playground for Great 

Power Competition: The Russia–China–United States Triangle. In Arctic fever: 

Political, economic & environmental aspects (pp. 3-30). Singapore: Springer 

Nature Singapore.  

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网].  (2018) 

“China’s Arctic Policy” [中国的北极政府].  Accessed May 1, 2025. Retrieved 

from: https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2018-01/26/content_5260891.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2015) 

“Statement by Minister Wang Yi at the Opening Ceremony of the Third Arctic 

Circle Assembly” [王毅部长在第三届北极圈论坛大会开幕式上的致辞, 中华人

民共和国中央人民政府]. Accessed November 22, 2024. Retrieved 

from:  http://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/vom/2015-10/19/content_2950053.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2013) 

“Advocating and forging a community of human destiny - A review of diplomacy 

since the 18th National Congress” [倡导和打造人类命运共同体—十八大以来外

交述评]. Accessed April 17, 2025. Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2013-

12/15/content_2548061.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2017) 

“Deputy Director General of the State Oceanic Administration explains the 

Regulations on the Administration of Administrative Licences for Arctic 

Expedition Activities” [国家海洋局副局长解读《北极考察活动行政许可管理

规定》]. Accessed April 4, 2025. Retrieved from: 

https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2017-09/20/content_5226465.htm 

82 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2019) 

“Foreign Ministry responds to U.S. accusation of China's participation in Arctic 

affairs: China does not overstep its bounds, does not lack position” [外交部回应美

方指责中国参与北极事务：中方不越位、不缺位]. Accessed April 10, 2025. 

Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/07/content_5389492.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2017) 

“International Arctic Forum for Cooperative Development Concludes in Russia” 

[力主合作开发的国际北极论坛在俄闭幕]. Accessed April 10, 2025.  Retrieved 

from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2017-03/31/content_5182371.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2019)  

“Li Keqiang's written interview with Russia's TASS news agency (full text)” [李克

强接受俄罗斯塔斯社书面采访（全文)]. Accessed April 10, 2025. Retrieved 

from: https://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/2019-09/16/content_5430056.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2019) 

“Ministry of Foreign Affairs: regrets failure to issue a common declaration at 

Arctic Council ministerial meeting” [外交部：对北极理事会部长级会议未能发

表共同宣言表示遗憾]. Accessed April 10, 2025. Retrieved from: 

https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/08/content_5389818.htm  

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2017) 

“State Oceanic Administration: frequency of China's Arctic scientific research 

increased to once a year” [国家海洋局：我国北极科考频次增至每年一次]. 

Accessed April 10, 2025. Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2017-

10/10/content_5230819.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2018) 

“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement on the State New Office 

"China's Arctic Policy" White Paper and other questions and answers” [外交部就

83 

国新办发表《中国的北极政策》白皮书等答问]. Accessed April 18, 2025. 

Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-01/26/content_5261152.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2019) 

“China Sub-Forum of the Arctic Circle Forum held in Shanghai” [北极圈论坛中

国分论坛在上海举行]. Accessed April 10, 2025 Retrieved from: 

https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/14/content_5391336.htm  

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2024) 

“Joint statement by the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China on 

deepening relations of comprehensive partnership and strategic co-operation 

entering a new era in the context of the 75th anniversary of the establishment of 

diplomatic relations between the two countries” [中华人民共和国和俄罗斯联邦

在两国建交 75 周年之际关于深化新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系的联合声明

（全文）, 中华人民共和国中央人民政府]. Accessed November 22, 2024. 

Retrieved from: https://www.gov.cn/yaowen/liebiao/202405/content_6951404.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China [中国政府网]. (2024) 

“The first ‘Arctic Express 1’ logistics train started in Russia” [首列“北极快线 1 号

”物流专列在俄开行]. Accessed April 10, 2025. Retrieved 

from:https://www.gov.cn/yaowen/liebiao/202407/content_6961713.htm 

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China. (2018) “China’s Arctic 

Policy”. Accessed November 22, 2024. Retrieved from: 

https://english.www.gov.cn/archive/white_paper/2018/01/26/content_2814760266

60336.htm  

The White House (2022) Arctic Strategy Accessed May 7, 2025. URL: 

https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/National-

Strategy-for-the-Arctic-Region.pdf  

US Department of Defence (2019) 2019 DoD Arctic Strategy. Accessed 

May 7, 2025. URL:https://media.defense.gov/2019/Jun/06/2002141657/-1/-

1/1/2019-DOD-ARCTIC-STRATEGY.PDF  

84 

US Department of Defence (2024) 2024 Arctic Strategy. Accessed May 7, 

2025. URL:https://man.fas.org/eprint/arctic-2024.pdf   

Vylegzhanin, A.I. & Kienko E.V. (2021). CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS 

OF NON-ARCTIC STATES ON THE STATUS OF THE ARCTIC. Bulletin of St. 

Petersburg University. Law, 12 (2), 296-318. (In Russian) 

Wang Chenguang. (2017). Bibliometric analysis of arctic humanities and 

social sciences research in China - statistics based on cssci journals. Journal of 

Ocean University of China: social science edition (2), 7. （王晨光. (2017). 中国

北极人文社科研究的文献计量分析——基于 cssci 期刊的统计数据. 中国海洋

大学学报：社会科学版(2), 7. ）(In Chinese) 

Wang, R. (2022). Current directions of Arctic research: a view from China. 

The Arctic: Ecology and Economics, 12(4), 491-499. (In Russian) 

Wendt,  A.  (1992) “Anarchy  is  what  States  Make  of  it:  The  Social 

Construction of Power Politics,” International Organization 46, no. 2 p 394 

Wendt,  A.  (1999).  Social  theory  of  international  politics  (Vol.  67). 

Cambridge university press. 

Wright,  D.  C.  (2011).  The  Dragon  Eyes  the  Top  of  the  World:.  US  Naval 

War College, China Maritime Studies Institute. 

Xie, Xia (2020).Analysing strategic rivalry and cooperation between China 

and the United States in the Arctic. American Studies, issue 6, 2020, pp 129-

143+208 [谢茜 & 夏立平.(2020).析中美在北极地区的战略竞争与合作. 美国问

题研究(02),129-143+208. doi:CNKI:SUN:MGWT.0.2020-02-006.] (In Chinese) 

Xu Qingchao, Wang Haimei. (2021) Chinese Arctic research in the 21st 

century: progress and challenges: an interview with research assistant Xu 

Qingchao Xu Qingchao; Wang Haimei; International Policy Studies 2021-08-15 

Journal 7 [徐庆超、王海媚 21 世纪以来中国的北极研究：进展与问题—徐庆

超助理研究员访谈 （《国际政治研究》（双月刊）2021 年 第 4 期）](In 

Chinese) 

85 

Yakovenko, A. V. (2023). Geopolitical fracture and Russia. What the new 

foreign policy concept is about. Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign 

Affairs of Russia. Moscow, 139. (In Russian) 

Yang, Jian (2014) Arctic shipping and China's Arctic policy positioning. 

International Observations 2014, Issue 1, pp. 123-137.[杨剑 (2014) 北极航运与中

国北极政策定位。国际观察 2014 年第 1 期 第 123-137 页。] (In Chinese) 

Yue, Gu (2024). New Arctic security situation under the Russian-Ukrainian 

conflict and implications for China; Russian Journal 2024-02-10 Issue 1 pp 79-98 [

岳鹏 &顾正声 (2024). 俄乌冲突下北极地区安全面临的新形势及对中国的影

响. 俄罗斯学刊第 14 卷总第 79 期 第 79-98 页] (In Chinese) 

Zabella, A. A. (2019). China's goals and interests in the Arctic. Vestnik of 

Moscow State Regional University. Series: History and Political Science, (4), 166-

175. (In Russian) 

Zakhariev, I. O. (2018). Economic strategy of the PRC in Scandinavia. Part 

1: Economic relations, 8(2), 181-192. 

Zakhariev, I. O. (2018). Prerequisites for the development of cooperation 

between the PRC and Canada in the Arctic. Economic Relations, 8(4), 549-554. (In 

Russian)  

Zakhariev, I. O. (2018). The PRC's economic strategy in Scandinavia (part 

2). Economic Relations, 8(3), 419-436. 

Zuenko, I. (2024). The Dragon Beyond the Arctic Circle: How China 

Justifies Its Claims to the Arctic (Profile). URL: https://profile.ru/abroad/drakon-

za-polyarnym-krugom-kak-knr-obosnovyvaet-svoi-pretenzii-na-arktiku-1472683/ 

Access date: 10.12.2024 (In Russian)  

 
 
 
 
 
