THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

STATE BUDGETARY HIGHER EDUCATION UNIT 

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY 

          «HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS» 

 FACULTY OF WORLD ECONOMY AND WORLD POLITICS 

                   International Program 'International Relations and Global Studies' 

Thesis Paper 

On the topic : 

«The Role of the U.S. Party Polarisation in the U.S. Foreign Policy Formation in 

Relation to Russia within the Context of the 2022-2024 Ukraine Crisis» 

By the student 

of the 4th year, 

                                      group 215 

 Anna Osokina 

Academic supervisor: 

Denis Stukal,  

Assistant Professor, 

School of Politics and Governance 

Moscow 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2 

Table of Contents 

Table of Contents...............................................................................................2 
1.  Introduction.................................................................................................. 3 
1.1. Contextualisation & Topic Outline........................................................3 
1.2. Literature Review.................................................................................. 6 
1.2.1. U.S. Party Polarisation.................................................................. 6 
1.2.2. U.S.-Russia relations & U.S. Foreign Policy vis-à-vis Russia......9 
1.3. Research Question & Hypothesis........................................................16 
1.4. Methodology & Conceptualisation..................................................... 17 
1.4.1. Theoretical Framework............................................................... 17 
1.4.2. Methods.......................................................................................18 
1.4.3. Conceptualization........................................................................21 
1.4.4. Scope of the Paper.......................................................................23 
1.4.5. Potential Shortcomings & Limitations........................................23 
1.4.6. Paper Outline...............................................................................24 
2. Historical & Theoretical Background......................................................... 25 
2.1. U.S. Party Polarisation as a Divisive Political Force.......................... 25 
2.2. U.S. Party Polarisation as an Intervening Variable in the U.S. Foreign 
Policy..........................................................................................................29 
2.3. Evolution of U.S.-Russia relations & U.S. Foreign Policy vis-à-vis 
Russia......................................................................................................... 32 
3. U.S. Party Polarisation with regard to Ukraine Crisis & Russia................. 39 
3.1. Democratic Perspective on 2022-2024 Ukraine Crisis & Russia........40 
3.2. Republican Perspective on 2022-2024 Ukraine Crisis & Russia........ 42 
3.3. 2022-2024 Ukraine Crisis as a Polarising Factor in U.S. Foreign 
Policy towards Russia................................................................................ 45 
4.Research Results & Concluding Remarks....................................................49 
4.1. Research Results..................................................................................49 
4.2. Discussion........................................................................................... 51 
4.3. Shortcomings & Limitations............................................................... 52 
5. Conclusion...................................................................................................54 
References....................................................................................................... 59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 

1.1. Contextualisation & Topic Outline   

3 

It  is  quite  conspicuous  that  the  international  system  has  undergone  seismic 

shifts over the past several years. From the tense geopolitical landscape to the 

rapidly  changing  world  order,  the  international  arena  is  splitting  into  two 

separate  political  camps,  driven,  among  other  things,  by  the  Ukraine  crisis. 

The  geopolitical crisis has reignited hostilities between the United States and 

Russia,  with  the  former  undertaking  harsh measures vis-à-vis the latter since 

2022  with  a  view  to  ending  the  Ukraine  crisis.  With  an  arguable  New  Cold 

War  presently  unfolding  between  the  West  and  the  East  (Achcar,  2023),  the 

world  is  largely  divided  between  those  supporting  Russia  and  those 

supporting  the  West’s  efforts  to  suppress  Russia.  The  domestic  political 

landscape  of  the  U.S.  is  no  exception  in  this  regard,  with  the  polarisation 

between  the Democratic Party and the Republican Party dividing the country 

alongside two divergent lines of reasoning, which has substantial implications 

for how the question of Ukraine is approached. It is only prudent, therefore, to 

delve  into  the  polarised  political scene of the U.S. in order to understand the 

significance  of  its  impact  on  the  foreign  policy  vis-à-vis  Russia  within  the 

context of the Ukraine crisis.  

Firstly,  it  is  notable  that  the  relations  between  the  United  States  and  Russia 

have undergone numerous shifts over the course of history, particularly, since 

the  dissolution of the USSR in 1991. Ranging from attempting a full-fledged 

integration  of  Russia  into  the  Western-led  world  order  to  being  completely 

unable  to  find  common  ground  on  which  to  build  cooperative  relations,  the 

U.S.  and  Russia  share  a  complex  history  that  is  filled  with  certain  points  of 

contention  that  seem  to  resurface  time  and  again.  One  of  such  contested 

points is the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation that dates back to the signing 

of the North Atlantic Treaty on April 4th, 1949 (Henrikson, 1980) and which 

emerged  as  a  response  of  the  U.S.  to  the  perceived  communist threat within 

 
 
4 

the  context  of  the Cold War. While decades have passed since its origination 

(during  which  the  Cold  War  ended  and  the  USSR  dissolved),  NATO  has 

continued  to  influence  the  U.S.-Russia  relations  well  into  the  21st  century. 

Inability  to  find  common  ground  and  to  reconcile  their  markedly  different 

stances  on  the  post-Soviet  space  makes  Russia  and  the  U.S.  locked  in  a 

conflict  that  underpins  their  relations  as  a  whole. Not long after the dawn of 

the  21st  century,  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11th,  2001  fell  upon  the 

United  States.  With  the  Bush  administration  launching  the  War  on  Terror, 

Russia  was  initially eager to cooperate with the U.S. in fighting international 

terrorism.  Yet,  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  approach  during  these  years  became 

irreconcilable with Russia’s perception of the way things ought to be done in 

the  international  system. Hence, such a discrepancy prompted a deterioration 

of relations between the U.S. and Russia that would largely come to define the 

nature  of  their  relations  for  decades  to  come.  As  such,  from  the  2008 

Bucharest  Summit  that  signified  a  drastic  divergence  in  their  respective 

stances  on  the  post-Soviet  space  to  the  2009  -  2012  policy  of  “reset”  that 

indicated  an  attempt  to  ameliorate  the  relations,  the  U.S.  and  Russia 

ultimately  clashed  in  their  interests  with  regard  to  the  post-Soviet space and 

NATO, leaving little room for cooperation.  

Secondly,  with  regard  to  the  expansion  of  NATO  into  the post-Soviet space, 

Ukraine has emerged as an overarching concern for both Russia and the U.S. 

(with  the  latter  willing  to  support  Ukraine’s  accession  to  NATO  and  the 

former  aiming  to  maintain  its  dominance  in  the  region).  This  particular 

tug-of-war  dates  back  to  the  2003-2004  Colour  Revolutions,  with  the  2004 

Orange Revolution being of specific relevance to this paper, as it represented 

a  clash  of  interests  between  the  U.S  and  Russia  over  the  government  in 

Ukraine.  Having  won  the  elections,  which  were  considered  to  be  fraudulent 

(Karatnycky,  2005),  pro-Russian  V.  Yanukovich  was  not  accepted  as  a 

legitimate  president  of  Ukraine,  leading  to  the  ultimate  installation  of  the 

 
 
5 

pro-Western V. Yushchenko, which Russia considered to be as an interference 

of the West in its near abroad. Similarly, the 2013 Euromaidan, which resulted 

in the installation of the pro-Western government and increased the likelihood 

of  Ukraine 

joining  NATO,  aggravated  Russia,  culminating 

in 

the 

incorporation of Crimea into the Russian Federation in 2014. The apex of the 

conflict, however, would not be reached until February of 2022, when Russia 

began undertaking measures to prevent further spread of the Western alliance 

in  the  region  which  Russia  considers  as  its  sphere  of  influence.  The  2022 

Ukraine  crisis,  as  such,  would  set  in  motion  a  cascade  of  events  that  would 

provoke  major  shifts  in  international  relations,  ultimately  defining  the  new 

international order.  

Particularly,  as  the  Ukraine  crisis  of  2022  reignited  hostilities  between  the 

U.S.  and  Russia,  the  former  has  swiftly  reformulated  its  foreign  policy 

vis-à-vis the latter. While it might seem as a mere response to a systemic shift, 

other  variables,  such  as  the  U.S.  party  polarisation,  may  have  accounted  for 

the  way  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  has  been  redesigned.  Being  a  powerful, 

multifaceted  phenomenon  in  politics,  the  consequences  of  polarisation  do, 

indeed,  extend  way beyond the domestic political scene of the United States. 

Notably,  the  ideological  divergence  that  drives the Democratic Party and the 

Republican  Party  is,  in  turn,  driving  the  U.S.  foreign  policy,  influencing  the 

U.S. approach to both Russia and Ukraine. The extent to which it is doing so, 

however,  is  not  so  transparent  and  requires  thorough  research  on  the  topic. 

This  paper  addresses the role of party polarisation on the U.S. foreign policy 

formation in order to shed light on the extent to which polarisation drives the 

U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia.  As  Ikenberry  (2022,  p.69)  has  put  it,  

“...the outside world has a greater stake in what happens in the United States”, 

meaning 

that 

the 

internal  dynamics  of 

the  U.S.  have  far-reaching 

consequences  for  the  world,  making  it vital to understand the precise way in 

which it exudes influence on the conduct of foreign affairs.  

 
 
6 

Therefore, the aforementioned events serve as a testimony to the fact that the 

world  is  living  through  a  significant,  course-altering  period  in  history.  The 

current  Ukraine  crisis  has  once  again  led  to  a  clash  of  interests  between the 

U.S.  (alongside  its  Western  allies)  and  Russia,  with  the  U.S.  having 

undertaken numerous measures in its foreign policy to suppress Russia. While 

this period bears resemblance to the period of the Cold War in that the world 

has  once  more  become  divided  along  two  divergent  lines of reasoning (with 

those  supporting  Ukraine  and  those  supporting  Russia),  this  period  is  still 

markedly  different  in  some  respects.  Notably,  the  unprecedented  level  of 

domestic party polarisation in the U.S. has to be taken into account as it may 

have  exerted  significant  influence  on  the  way  the  U.S. conducted its foreign 

policy in relation to Russia within the context of the Ukraine crisis.  

1.2. Literature Review  

1.2.1. U.S. Party Polarisation  

The notion of polarisation is far from being new on the political landscape of 

the  United  States,  which  accounts  for  a  myriad  of  studies  that  have  been 

conducted  on  this  topic.  The  U.S.  party  polarisation,  in  particular,  has 

attracted  substantial  attention  from  scholars,  largely  owing to an exponential 

increase  in the divergence between Democrats and Republicans over the past 

years.  Due  to  it  being  influenced  by  numerous  external  and  internal  factors, 

different  aspects  of  polarisation  have  been  widely  researched  by  scholars, 

some of whose works are outlined below.  

Prior to delving into party polarisation in the U.S., it is worth looking at how 

the  issue  of  polarisation  per  se  has  been  approached  by  scholars  so  far. 

Hetherington  (2009),  for  example,  distinguishes  between  elite  and  mass 

polarisation,  stating  that  the  former  does not necessarily correspond with the 

latter.  Alternatively,  Van  Der  Veen  (2021)  cautions  against  using  a  narrow 

 
 
 
 
7 

definition  of  polarisation,  offering,  instead,  a  four-dimensional  view  of 

polarisation.  The  author  explores  an interplay between affective, ideological, 

mass  and  elite  polarisation,  stating  that  all  of  them  have  to  be considered to 

render  a  comprehensive  understanding of polarisation (Van Der Veen, 2021). 

One inference that can be made from this is that polarisation is a multifaceted 

phenomenon,  interpretation  of  which  is  dependent  upon  the  nature  of  study 

and research.  

Moving  on  to  the  party  polarisation  in  the  United  States,  scholars  tend  to 

research  both  the  causes  and  the  consequences  of  polarisation  within  U.S. 

politics. In their study of polarisation, Hare & Poole (2014) find that the U.S. 

political  scene  is  highly  polarised,  attributing  this  to  the  growing  partisan 

divergence in terms of ideology and to the exposure to new social and cultural 

issues.  More  particularly,  Caro  (2016)  explores  the  causes  of  polarisation  in 

the  U.S.,  stating  that  it  is  the  long-term  trends  that  have  shaped  the  current 

accelerating  polarisation,  replacing  bipartisan  consensus  that  is  essential  for 

laws to be swiftly passed. One reason behind this lies in voters moving away 

from  the  political  center,  making  it  less  feasible  to  reach  consensus  (Caro, 

2016).  Similarly,  Pildes  (2011)  researches  the  causes  of  hyperpolarisation  in 

the  U.S.,  claiming  that  the  political  center  is  dissipating  both  among 

politicians  and  voters.  The  author  aims  to  identify  whether  polarisation  is 

inherent  in  the  U.S.  democracy  or  it  has  a  fleeting  nature,  ultimately 

concluding 

that,  being  caused  by  deeply-rooted  structural  problems, 

polarisation  is,  indeed,  inherent  in  American  politics  (Pildes,  2011). 

Therefore,  it  is  evident  that  the notion of polarisation permeates the political 

scene  of  the  U.S.,  with  the  party polarisation being driven by a disappearing 

political center and the emergence of novel cultural and social issues. 

Being such a key feature of contemporary U.S. politics, party polarisation has 

a significant impact on how the government functions. In the seminal work on 

 
 
 
8 

polarisation,  Lee  (2015) traces the implications of the U.S. party polarisation 

on  the  efficiency  of  the  U.S. government and the ways in which polarisation 

negatively  affects  the  executive,  the  legislative  and  the  judicial  branches  of 

the  government.  More  specifically,  Jones  (2001)  cited  polarisation  as  a  key 

factor  in  the  production  of  a  legislative  gridlock,  which  represents  a  policy 

stalemate with the legislative process being suspended and the Congress being 

unable  to  pass  policies.  This  is  closely  related  to  the  way  polarisation 

influences  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  formation.  Particularly,  Kalėda  (2023) 

states  that  the  U.S.  domestic  polarisation  is  detrimental  to  the  U.S.  foreign 

policy  as  it  damages  its  credibility  and  divides  Republicans  and  Democrats 

over  such  issues  as  aid  to Ukraine, while preserving bipartisan consensus on 

the  phenomenon  “rise  of  China”.  Similarly,  Tama  (2024)  claims  that  while 

democrats  and  republicans  are  polarised,  bipartisan consensus is still present 

as  the  parties  cooperate  in  a  myriad  of  ways,  most  prominently  on  certain 

international  issues.  Notably,  the  aforementioned  authors  have  focused  on 

polarisation  as  a  predominantly  negative  phenomenon  that  affects  the 

efficiency  of  the  U.S.  government.  An  alternate  view  on  polarisation, 

however,  was  proposed  by  Abramovitz  (2010),  who  claims  that  polarisation 

need  not  be  an  inherently  negative force. The author, on the contrary, claims 

that the greater the polarisation between the elites (and, consequently, parties), 

the  clearer  the  ideological  choice  presented  to  people  (Abramovitz,  2010). 

Thus, while the U.S. party polarisation can be viewed in either a positive or a 

negative  light,  the  latter  view  presumably  dominates  in  academia,  with 

polarisation  being  often  cited  as  a  cause  of  legislative  impasse  and  foreign 

policy that lacks credibility. 

To  conclude, polarisation is a concept that can be utilised in various contexts 

due  to  its  multidimensional  nature.  Yet,  a  large  pool of work on polarisation 

particularly  concerns  the  U.S.  political  scene,  where  polarisation  between 

Democrats  and  Republicans has dominated the political agenda over the past 

 
 
9 

several decades. The causes and the implications of the U.S. party polarisation 

on the efficiency of the legislative branch of the U.S. government, particularly 

with regard to the U.S. foreign policy, have been studied plentifully. However, 

what has not been studied in such intricate detail is the way polarisation plays 

a  role  in  the  formation  of  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia  within the 

Ukraine crisis. Considering the omnipresent nature of polarisation in the U.S., 

it can be presumed that it exudes considerable influence on the way the issue 

is approached.  

1.2.2. U.S.-Russia relations & U.S. Foreign Policy vis-à-vis Russia  

The  United  States  and  Russia  share  a  complex  history  that  is  rich  in  events 

which,  at  times,  drastically  altered  the  following course of their interactions. 

Below  are  some  of  the  works  and  studies  that  delve  into  the  U.S.-Russia 

relations,  ranging,  notably,  from  the  consequences  of  the  dissolution  of  the 

USSR  in  1991  to  the  role  of  NATO  in  the  U.S.-Russia  relations,  with  a 

specific focus on the Cold War legacy that continues to influence the bilateral 

relations  between  the  two  states.  Notably,  the  post-Cold  War relations (from 

1991 up to the 2022-2024 Ukraine crisis) between the U.S. and Russia can be 

divided  into  several  stages  that  have  been  widely  researched  in  academia, 

namely:  cooperation  and  optimistic  outlook  on  the  bilateral  relations  with  a 

subsequent  gradual  deterioration  (1991-1999),  the  relations  oscillating 

between  cooperation  and  confrontation  (2000-2008),  the  ‘reset’  of  relations 

(2009-2012),  deterioration  of  the  relations  (2012-2021),  and  ultimate 

decoupling (2022-2024).  

Firstly, the dissolution of the USSR in 1991 served as a catalyst behind a new 

strand  of  the  U.S.-Russia  relations,  initially  considered  to  be  imbued  with 

optimism  about  the  future  of  their  relations.  The  hopes  of  this  period, 

however,  gradually  gave  way  to  tensions  and  confrontation.  According  to 

Smeltz et al. (2016), this period was, indeed, viewed by many as a prospect of 

 
 
 
10 

improvement in the U.S.-Russia relations, which ultimately failed to manifest. 

Numerous  studies,  as  such,  explore  this  new  strand  of  bilateral  U.S.-Russia 

relations  with  a  specific  focus  on  why  sustainable  cooperation  was not fully 

achieved between the two states. This view is largely supported by Bugayova 

(2019),  who  stated  that,  becoming  the  first  president  of  the  newly  born 

Russian  state,  Boris  Yeltsin  aimed at promoting democracy and ameliorating 

the  relations  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia.  Still,  the  Russian  foreign  policy 

was  gradually  becoming  more  assertive  and  less  conducive  to  cooperation 

with the U.S. over the mid-1990s, with the largest blow to the relations being 

dealt  by  NATO’s  decision  to  intervene  in  Yugoslavia  in  1999  (Bugayova, 

2019).  Zelikow  (1994),  while  sharing  the  initial  hopes  for  the  U.S.-Russia 

cooperation,  supported  both  by  president  George  H.  W.  Bush  and  president 

Bill Clinton, also stressed how quickly this optimism had dissipated. Focusing 

on  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  specifically,  Zelikow  (1994)  states that, while the 

Clinton  administration  took  pride  in  their  successful  foreign  policy  towards 

Russia, the emphasis on an internal Russian reform was quite precarious, with 

the  clash  of  interests  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  ultimately  prevailing. 

Furthermore, by starting with a sequential history of the turbulent U.S.-Russia 

relations  in  the  post-Cold  War  period,  Rumer  &  Sokolsky  (2019)  go  on  to 

argue  that  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia  exemplified  rigid 

consistency  since  1991,  leaving  little  hope  for  durable  cooperation.  The 

authors  claim  that  despite  a  change  of  several  U.S. administrations over this 

period,  the  U.S.  consistently  refused  to  fully  accept  Russia  and  its  domestic 

affairs, emphasising democracy promotion and the primacy of NATO, causing 

the  deterioration  of  relations  (Rumer  &  Sokolsky,  2019).  By  contrast,  for 

Rostow  (1992), who emphasised the congruence between the structure of the 

international  system  after  the  collapse  of  the  USSR  and  the  U.S.  foreign 

policy goals, it was evident that the U.S. would achieve those goals swiftly if 

it  were  to  adopt  an  active  foreign  policy  stance.  Moreover,  Katz  (2014) 

highlights  the  fact  that  each  of  the  post-Cold  War  U.S.  administrations  has 

 
11 

attempted  to  ameliorate  relations  and  partner  with  Russia.  Instead,  however, 

despite  adopting  active  stances, neither American nor Russian foreign policy 

goals vis-à-vis each other were fully achieved after the collapse of the Soviet 

Union.  One  of  the reasons was an inability to agree on the post-Soviet space 

and the role of NATO in a post-Cold war world.  

Secondly,  between  2000  and  2008  the  nature  of  the  U.S.-Russia  relations 

tended to alternate between confrontation and cooperation. Tsygankov (2007) 

distinguishes  this  period  into  two  separate  policies,  pursued  by  Russian 

president  Vladimir  Putin,  the  first  one  focusing  on  pragmatism  and 

maintaining  great  power  status,  the  second,  starting  around  the  mid-2000s, 

focusing  on  an  assertive  stance of Russia in the world and a growing critical 

stance towards the U.S. foreign policy. As the start of the 21st century brought 

the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11th,  2001,  Gladkyy  (2003)  states  that  it 

prompted  an  intensification  of  the  U.S.-Russia  relations,  with  the  two 

countries  agreeing  to cooperate in fighting international terrorism. Moreover, 

the Joint Declaration, signed by George W. Bush and Vladimir Putin in 2002, 

highlighted  the  nations’  dedication  to  reciprocal,  open,  and  trustworthy 

relations,  contributing  to  the  establishment  of the NATO-Russia Council and 

ameliorating  the  NATO-Russia  relations  to  a  previously  unseen  degree 

(Gladkyy, 2003). While this improvement in the U.S.-Russia relations seemed 

to  eliminate  the  remnants  of  the  Cold  War  logic,  this  notion  was  soon 

disproved  by  the  events  that  followed.  Particularly,  Lynch  (2018)  states  that 

the  U.S.-Russia  relations  have  been  experiencing  gradual  deterioration 

approximately  since  2003,  with  a  strong  bipartisan  consensus  in  the  U.S. 

about the impossibility of ameliorating relations with Russia. Several reasons 

may account for neither Russia nor the U.S. willing to cooperate, with one of 

the  most  cited  ones  in  academia  being  the  Orange  Revolution,  which, 

according to Herd (2005), was perceived by Russia as a revolution instigated 

by the West. This notion strengthened to such an extent that it started shaping 

 
 
12 

Russia’s  foreign  policy,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  post-Soviet  space 

(Herd,  2005).  As  such,  the  tensions  over  the  post-Soviet  space,  widely 

researched in academia, have started to dominate in the U.S.-Russia relations. 

Particularly,  Matsaberidze  (2015)  focuses  on  the  Russian  emphasis  on  the 

primacy  in  the  ‘near  abroad’  with the tensions over the prospects of Georgia 

and  Ukraine  entering  NATO  being  at  the  heart  of  confrontation between the 

West  and  Russia  in  2008.  Similarly,  Lazarević  (2009)  focuses  on the role of 

NATO  and  the  potential  membership  of  Georgia  and  Ukraine  in  the 

U.S.-Russia  relations,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  geopolitical  position  of 

the organisation. One inference that can be made from these studies is that in 

spite of attempts to ameliorate relations between 2000 and 2008, the relations 

were still imbued with the remnants of the Cold War and its legacy.  

In  a  stark  departure  from  the  previous  course  of  action,  the  U.S. and Russia 

launched  a  policy  of  ‘reset’  in  2009-2012,  promoted  by  the  Obama 

administration and Russian president Dmitry Medvedev. This period aimed at 

increasing  cooperation  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia,  alongside  eliminating 

hostilities  between  the  two  states.  By  stating  that  the  improvement  of  the 

U.S.-Russia relations is directly related to the emergence of novel agreements 

and  cooperation  on  global  issues,  Charap  (2013)  notes  that  the  period  of 

‘reset’  was  one  of the most productive ones in the history of the U.S.-Russia 

relations.  Particularly,  Charap  (2013)  cites  numerous  joint  achievements  of 

the  two  states,  among  which  are  the  New  START  treaty,  cooperation  on the 

question  of  Afghanistan  and  the  installation  of  the  Bilateral  Presidential 

Commission  to  foster  cooperation  on  a  myriad  of  matters.  What  is  more, 

Roberts (in Tsygankov, 2018, p.245) states that the period of ‘reset’ promoted 

better  ties  between  Russia  and  NATO,  in  addition  to  president  Obama 

recognising  Russia’s  importance  to  the  U.S.  and  its  goals.  While  this  period 

was,  indeed,  viewed  as  an  opportunity  to  improve  the  U.S.-Russia relations, 

scholars  such  as  Ratti  (2013)  were  sceptical of the true intentions of the two 

 
 
13 

states.  More  particularly,  Ratti  (2013) stated that while certain goals, such as 

the New START Treaty and the operations of the NATO-Russia Council, were 

attained,  a  genuine  attempt  to cooperate was present neither on the U.S. side 

nor  on  the  Russian  side.  Having  started  with  renewed  hopes  for  the 

U.S.-Russia  cooperation,  the  policy  of  ‘reset’,  as  such,  had  a  relatively 

fleeting,  unsustainable  nature,  as  is  evident  from  the  next  period  in  the 

U.S.-Russia relations.  

With  the  return  of  Vladimir  Putin  to  the  presidency  in  2012  the  bilateral 

relations  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  started  to  deteriorate  further,  mostly, 

according  to  Charap  (2013),  due  to  president  Putin’s  non-acceptance  of  the 

U.S. foreign policy trajectory and, hence, his reluctance to cooperate with the 

U.S.  More  particularly,  Roberts  (in  Tsygankov,  2018,  p.247)  states  that  the 

tensions  over  NATO  have  once  again  reemerged  as  a  point  of  contention 

between  the  U.S.  and  Russia,  with  virtually  no  cooperation  having  been 

achieved  between  the  two  states  since  Vladimir  Putin’s  return  to  power  in 

2012. One of the most seminal moments in the U.S.-Russia relations came in 

2014  with  Russia  incorporating  Crimea,  which,  according  to  Matsaberidze 

(2015),  was  a  manifestation  of  Russia’s  security concerns over the prospects 

of  Ukraine  joining  NATO.  Furthermore,  Katz  (2020)  states  that  it  was  the 

incorporation  of  Crimea  in  2014  by Russia that has effectively put an end to 

the  policy  of  ‘reset’  and any attempts at cooperation, arguably leading to the 

revival  of  the  Cold  War  rivalry.  What  is  more,  the  relations  were  further 

aggravated by the alleged interference of Russia into the 2016 elections in the 

United States, making it virtually impossible to manage the relations amicably 

(Lynch,  2018).  While  searching  for  the  key  causes  behind  such  a  negative 

chain of events, scholars such as Smeltz et al. (2016) focus on the perception 

as one of the key determinants of the relations’ deterioration, citing distrust as 

one  of  the  most  fundamental  reasons  behind  an  inability  of  the  U.S.  and 

Russia to achieve long-lasting cooperation. Such distrust is, once again, most 

 
 
14 

likely  a  remnant  of  the  tense  Cold  War  ideological  rivalry,  which  is  also 

plentifully researched in academia. Scholars such as Newlin et al. (2020) and 

Avdaliani  (2017),  for  example,  use  the  Cold  War  as  a  point  of  reference  in 

their  research,  stating  that  in  2020  and  2017,  respectively,  relations between 

Russia and the U.S. have been at their nadir since the end of the Cold War in 

1991. Notably, Sümer (2020) states that even though the Cold War ended, its 

legacy proved to be long-lasting, impacting the future of relations between the 

U.S.  and  Russia.  Therefore,  it  is  evident  that  the  period  between  2012  and 

2021  was  filled  with  numerous  obstacles  that  prevent  the  U.S.  and  Russia 

from  achieving  durable  and  mutually-beneficial  cooperation, not least owing 

to the legacy of the Cold War that continues to influence their relations. 

Finally,  while  the  U.S. and Russia have been at odds for the most part of the 

21st  century,  the  ultimate  decoupling  between  them  did  not  occur  until  the 

2022  Ukraine  crisis.  Having  provoked  major  shifts  in  the  post-Cold  War 

order,  the  2022  Ukraine  crisis  attracted  substantial  attention  from  scholars 

who have been studying the U.S.-Russia relations for decades. Notably, these 

scholars  can  be  divided  into  two  separate  lines  of  reasoning,  the  first  one 

adhering  to  the  realist  principles  and  the  second  one  adhering  to  the  liberal 

principles.  Notably,  in  discussing  the  2022  Ukraine  crisis,  one  of  the  most 

prominent  proponents  of  the  realist  paradigm,  Mearsheimer  (2022),  reviews 

the  causes  of the crisis. By contradicting the prevalent Western narrative that 

Vladimir  Putin  is  to  blame  for  the  start  of  the  crisis,  Mearsheimer  (2022) 

claims  that,  instead,  the  West  largely  bears  responsibility  for  the  crisis, with 

the  expansion  of  NATO  being  at  the  heart  of  the  problem.  A  year  later, 

Mearsheimer  (2023)  further  researched  the  ongoing  crisis,  stating  that  the 

possibility  of  a  peace agreement is non-existent between Russia and Ukraine 

(alongside the West), due to the existential nature of the crisis, where losing is 

not  an  acceptable  option  for either of the sides. Similarly, by juxtaposing the 

views of realists and the views of liberals on NATO and Ukraine, Walt (2022) 

 
 
15 

takes  a  realist  stance  on  the  crisis, claiming that the expansion of NATO has 

inevitably  generated  the  crisis  in the first place. According to Walt (2022), it 

is  an  inability  of  liberals  to  acknowledge  the  realist  paradigm  (in  this  case 

Russia’s  security  concerns  over  NATO  enlargement)  that  spurs  the  crisis.  In 

stark  contrast  to  this  view  and  adhering  to  the  liberal  paradigm,  Kramer 

(2022)  criticises  Russia  for  having  started  the  2022 Ukraine crisis, centering 

his  argument  around  democratic  values,  emphasising  how  vital  it  is  that  the 

West  defeats  Russia  so  as  to  preserve  the  ideals  of  democracy.  In  a  similar 

liberal fashion, Fukuyama (2022) positions the 2022 Ukraine conflict within a 

broader  crisis  of  the  liberal  world  order,  stating  that  even  if  the  conflict  is 

resolved  in  favour  of  the  West,  the  Western  order  will  still  face  substantial 

hardships,  overcoming  which  is  an  everlasting  process.  Therefore,  it  is 

evident  that  the  2022  Ukraine  crisis  drastically  divides  scholars  in  their 

stances on the crisis, with some adhering to the realist paradigm and others to 

the liberal strand of thought.  

Overall,  the  U.S.-Russia  relations  after  the  collapse  of  the  USSR  can  be 

categorised  into  five  distinct  stages,  ranging  from  the  initial  hopes  of 

cooperation  and  mutually  beneficial  relations  to  the  ultimate  decoupling 

between  the  two  states.  Most  of  the  studies  that  research  the  U.S.-Russia 

relations,  however,  primarily  focus  on  the  reasons  that  prevented  the  two 

states  from  bettering  their  relations  in  the  post-Cold  War  world.  The 

post-Soviet  space  and  the  role  of  NATO  are  the  most  cited  factors  in  the 

deterioration  of  the  bilateral  relations  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia.  Despite 

widely  researched  attempts  to  cooperate (fighting international terrorism and 

the policy of ‘reset’), the feelings of mutual mistrust have ultimately pervaded 

the  relations.  The  recent  2022  Ukraine  crisis  has  further  aggravated  the 

U.S.-Russia  relations,  leaving  the  two  states unable to achieve a long-lasting 

cooperation.   

 
 
1.3. Research Question & Hypothesis 

16 

The  literature  review  highlights  the  fact  that  while  an  extensive  pool  of 

research  has  been  conducted  on  the  U.S.  party  polarisation  and  the  U.S. 

foreign  policy  towards  Russia  (including  the  context  of  the  2022-2024 

Ukraine  crisis),  a  gap  exists  between  the  extensively  researched  U.S.  party 

polarisation  and  the  consequent  U.S.  approach  to  the  2022-2024  Ukraine 

crisis.  

Particularly,  it  is  not  clear  how,  if  at  all,  the  U.S.  polarisation influences the 

way the U.S. approaches Russia and the Ukraine crisis, with the U.S. arguably 

targeting  Russia  as  a  way  of  easing  the  pressure  on  Ukraine.  What  is  more, 

most  studies that cover the recent crisis in detail are relatively outdated, with 

little  research  having  been  conducted  on  the  period between 2022 and 2024. 

Thus, taking into account the available debates on the U.S. party polarisation 

and  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  vis-à-vis  Russia,  alongside  the  discovered 

research gap, the following research question was formulated: To what extent 

do  the  views  of  the  Democratic Party and the Republican Party diverge with 

regard to the Ukraine crisis and how, if at all, did it influence the formation of 

the  U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia  within  the  context  of  the  current 

Ukraine  crisis  in  2022-2024?  To  answer  this  question,  the  following 

hypothesis  will  be  tested:  The  views  of  the  Democratic  Party  and  the 

Republican Party diverge significantly with regard to the Ukraine crisis, with 

this  discrepancy  having  been  a  prominent  intervening  variable  in  the 

formation  of  the  U.S  foreign policy towards Russia within the context of the 

Ukraine crisis between 2022-2024. 

The  paper,  therefore,  will  aim  at  filling  the  research  gap  by  identifying  the 

views of the Democratic Party and the Republican Party on the Ukraine crisis 

alongside  determining  the  ways  in  which  this  could  have  impacted  the 

 
 
 
formation  of  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  initiatives  vis-à-vis  Russia  over  the 

period of 2022-2024.  

17 

1.4. Methodology & Conceptualisation  

In  order  to  trace  the  influence  of  the  U.S.  party  polarisation  on  the  U.S. 

foreign  policy  vis-à-vis  Russia  within  the  context  of  the  Ukraine  crisis,  the 

methods,  alongside  theoretical  and  chronological  frameworks,  are  outlined 

below. In addition, this section aims at conceptualising the key notions used in 

this  paper,  primarily  concerning  polarisation  and  its  various  definitions  as 

well as the core ideas from neoclassical realism, as this theory aims at taking 

into account both systemic factors and internal dynamics of a state to explain 

the formulation of foreign policy.  

1.4.1. Theoretical Framework  

For  the  purposes  of  this  paper,  the  primary  theoretical  framework  applied is 

neoclassical  realism,  which,  apart  from  considering  the  international  system 

and  its  incentives,  helps  in  identifying  the  way  domestic  variables  of a state 

influence this state’s foreign policy.  

Initially  introduced  by  Rose  (1998),  this  theory  is  generally  viewed  as  a 

modified version of structural realism, whereby it takes some of the premises 

of  structural  realism  and  ameliorates  it  in  order  to  render  a  comprehensive 

understanding of what drives foreign policy decisions of states in response to 

external  obstacles  and  incentives.  Among  four  theories  of  foreign  policy 

identified by Rose (1998), innenpolitik theories that view domestic affairs of a 

state as the sole determinant of its foreign policy are, according to the author, 

largely 

oversimplified 

and  misguided.  The 

reason  behind 

this 

oversimplification  is  the  neglect  of the international system and its influence 

on a state’s foreign policy. What Rose (1998) proposed, instead, is to take into 

consideration  both  the  international  system  and  the  systemic  incentives 

 
 
 
 
18 

(independent  variable)  and  the  internal  factors  (intervening  variable)  when 

researching the foreign policy of a state. This approach to foreign policy was 

termed  “neoclassical  realism”  (Rose,  1998).  Notably,  some  scholars  divide 

neoclassical  realism  into  two  distinct  subtypes. In their research, Ripsman et 

al.  (2016) identified Type I neoclassical realism that merely aims at bettering 

structural  realism  via  the  introduction  of  domestic  variables  and  type  II 

neoclassical  realism  that  focuses  on  systemic  incentives  alongside  domestic 

variables,  with  the  latter  being  associated  with  what  Rose  (1998)  initially 

proposed.  

This  paper  primarily  focused  on  Type  II  neoclassical  realism  as  it  aids  in 

explaining the ways in which the U.S. foreign policy has been influenced both 

by systemic incentives of the international environment of 2022-2024 and by 

an  intervening  variable  of  domestic  party  polarisation  within  the  United 

States.  

Figure 1 

Key Aspects of the Paper Through the Prism of Neoclassical Realism of Rose 

(1998)  

Note: Adapted from Rose (1998)  

This figure illustrates the relationship between the variables proposed by Rose 

(1998) in neoclassical realism and the aspects of the thesis. This was done to 

showcase the topic of the thesis through the prism of neoclassical realism and 

to prove the theory’s applicability to the topic and the research question. 

 
 
 
 
1.4.2. Methods  

19 

For  the  purposes  of  collecting  and  analysing  data,  relevant  to  the  research 

paper,  qualitative  methods  have  been  implemented  throughout  the  paper.  In 

particular,  information  and  data  were  collected  from  secondary  and  primary 

sources. To provide an example of primary sources, think tanks, such as Pew 

Research  Center,  were  used  to  collect  statistics  and  raw  data  on  the  topic, 

alongside  speeches  and  debates  of  the  U.S.  politicians.  With  regard  to  the 

secondary  sources,  a  wide  array  of  books  and  scholarly  articles  have  been 

researched to introduce an academic debate on the research topic as well as to 

provide  a  thorough  historical  and  theoretical  background.  The  primary 

method  used  in  this  paper  is  a  qualitative  method  of narrative analysis. This 

method, according to Oppermann & Spencer in Mello & Ostermann (2023), is 

widely  implemented  in  the  realm  of  Foreign  Policy  Analysis  as  it  aids  in 

identifying  the  views  and  attitudes of politicians with regard to issues within 

the  realm  of  foreign  policy.  By  focusing  on  organising  and  constructing  a 

certain  narrative,  this  method  can  render  a  comprehensive  understanding  of 

the  views  of  decision-makers,  who  are,  in  most  cases,  interpret  events  and 

their  context  through  the  prism  of  a  particular  narrative.  Being applicable to 

the research question, narrative analysis has been implemented with a view to 

researching  polarisation  between  the  Democratic and the Republican Parties, 

comparing the contrasting narratives of the Democrats and the Republicans on 

the Ukraine crisis and Russia, tracing how, if at all, polarisation between them 

influences the production of foreign policy decisions.  

Figure 2 

Coding Scheme for the Narratives within The Research Paper       

 
20 

Note: Adapted from Oppermann & Spencer in Mello & Ostermann (2023) 

Figure  2  illustrates  a  coding  scheme,  where  the  interplay  of  three  key 

components,  namely,  setting,  characterization,  and  emplotment,  produces  a 

narrative.  Each  component  is  filled  with  the  data  relevant  to  the  research 

question,  focusing  on  Democrats  and  Republicans  within  the  context  of  the 

Ukraine  crisis  as well as the presidential and vice presidential debates within 

the  2024  U.S.  presidential  elections,  alongside  convention  speeches.  By 

constructing  and  comparing  the  narrative  of  Democrats  and  the  narrative  of 

Republicans  with  regard  to  the crisis and Russia, via the presidential and the 

vice presidential debates and speeches, the approach to the Ukraine crisis and 

the consequent foreign policy towards Russia can be determined.  

What is more, a mixture of inductive and deductive reasoning is used to form 

a  general understanding of how specific nuances of party polarisation impact 

the  broader  tendencies  of  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  (particularly  in  relation  to 

Russia  in  the  context  of  the  current  Ukraine  crisis  in  2022-2024)  and  to 

understand  how  the  application  of  a  theoretical  framework  (neoclassical 

realism)  can  enhance  the  understanding  of  the  nuances  of  the  topic  at  large. 

 
 
 
21 

The  aforementioned  methods  allowed  to  thoroughly  analyse  the  existing 

literature  on  the  topic  and  to  produce  a  cohesive  answer  to  the  stated above 

research  question  by  tracing  the  correlation  between  the  U.S.  party 

polarisation and the U.S. foreign policy decisions. 

1.4.3. Conceptualization 

Next, a pool of concepts will be identified that have been used throughout this 

paper.  Considering  the  fact  that  the  research  mainly  revolves  around  the 

concept of polarisation, most of the concepts are related specifically to it, with 

a  few  notions  regarding  the  theoretical  framework  and  the  Ukraine  crisis 

having also been introduced.  

Firstly,  polarisation  can  be  defined  as  an  ideological  divide  between  two 

particular  groups  that  hold  polar  opposite,  extreme  views  on  specific  issues. 

Being deeply rooted in spatial theory by Downs (1957), who posits that voters 

are  positioned  alongside  a  one-dimensional  left-right  spectrum,  it  is  quite 

common  to  view  polarisation  in the form of this spectrum, where the greater 

the  distance  between  two  opposite  poles,  the  greater  the  polarisation  is. 

Additionally,  apart  from  ideological  polarisation,  there  is  also  a  notion  of 

affective polarisation, introduced by Iyengar et al. (2012), and which refers to 

an emotional divide between the in-party group and out-party group, where a 

positive  feeling  towards  one’s  own  party  goes  hand-in-hand  with  a  negative 

feeling  towards  an  opposing  party.  Here,  partisanship  plays  a  vital  role  on 

which  people  tend  to  build  their  social  identities  (McCarty,  2019).  A 

distinction  should  be  made,  however,  between  polarisation  and  partisanship, 

in  order  not  to  confuse  these  two  terms,  as  the  former refers to extremity of 

views, while the latter refers to a strong party loyalty and is closely related to 

affective  polarisation.  While  this  paper  primarily  focuses  on  ideological 

polarisation, partisanship and affective polarisation are also taken into account 

as contributing to party polarisation factors. Additionally, a similar concept of 

 
 
 
22 

bipartisanship (or bipartisan consensus) is referred to in this paper and, in the 

context of this paper, it can be defined as a consensus between the Democratic 

Party and the Republican Party on a specific issue. Polarisation may be found 

in  a  plethora  of  various  contexts,  however,  for  the  purposes  of  this  paper, 

polarisation  is  viewed  specifically  in  the  political  context  of  the  U.S.  party 

politics.  Party  polarisation,  therefore,  can  be  defined  as  “situations  where 

polarisation  is  organised  around  parties”  (McCarty,  2019).  In  the case of the 

U.S.,  in  particular,  these  parties  are  the  Democratic  Party,  associated  with 

liberal values, and the Republican Party, associated with conservative values, 

that tend to take contrasting stances on the issues. Thus, this paper looks into 

the  U.S.  party  polarisation  as  an  ideological  divergence  between  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican  Party,  with  this  divergence  being 

exacerbated via affective polarisation and partisanship.  

Secondly, when it comes to the theoretical framework of neoclassical realism 

(Rose,  1998),  certain  key  concepts,  relevant  to  this  paper,  are  outlined  in 

Figure  1.  Of  particular  importance  to  this  paper  are  the  systemic  incentives 

(that  serve  as  an  independent  variable)  in  the  form  of  the  2022-2024 

international  environment  and  internal  factors  (that  serve  as  an  intervening 

variable)  in  the  form  of  the  U.S.  party  polarisation.  The  application  of 

neoclassical  realism,  as  such,  presupposes  viewing such an internal factor as 

polarisation as an intervening variable in the production of a foreign policy of 

a state.  

In  addition,  several  concepts  have  to  be  outlined  with  regard  to  the Ukraine 

crisis  and  the  U.S.-Russia  relations  within  the  context  of  this  crisis. 

Particularly,  this  research  paper  uses  a  concept  by  Hoffman  (2007),  termed 

hybrid warfare, to describe the characteristics of the nature of a confrontation 

between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine  crisis.  Hybrid 

warfare, according to Hoffman (2007), is essentially an amalgamation of both 

 
 
 
23 

conventional and non-conventional components of warfare. What is more, the 

nature  of  the  U.S.-Russia  confrontation  within  the  context  of  the  Ukraine 

crisis  is  described  by  the  concept  of  a  proxy  war,  which,  in  this  case,  is 

characterised  by  an  absence  of  a  direct  military  confrontation  between  the 

U.S. and Russia and a presence of the U.S. support for Ukraine.  

1.4.4. Scope of the Paper  

Within  the  scope  of this paper is party polarisation in the U.S. between 2022 

and 2024, and its influence on the foreign policy decisions over this period in 

relation  to  Russia  within  the  context  of  the  Ukraine  crisis.  While  the  paper 

briefly  discusses  the  nuances  of  polarisation  itself,  the  origins  and  causes of 

polarisation  are  largely  beyond  the  scope  of  this  research  and  will  not  be 

considered in detail. What is discussed in detail is the way in which divergent 

views  of  Democrats  and  Republicans,  expressed  in  the  polarisation  between 

the Democratic Party and the Republican Party in the U.S., influence the U.S. 

foreign policy stance towards Russia in 2022-2024, considering the context of 

the  Ukraine  crisis.  Additionally,  for  the  purposes  of  providing  a  thorough 

historical  background,  the  U.S.-Russia  relations  themselves  are  considered 

with  a  specific  focus  on the period between the collapse of the Soviet Union 

in 1991 and the start of the Ukraine crisis in 2022.  

1.4.5. Potential Shortcomings & Limitations 

As for potential shortcomings, it is possible that, even if established, a causal 

relationship  between  the  U.S.  polarisation  and  the  alterations  in  the  U.S. 

foreign  policy  decisions  towards  Russia  may  not  be  directly proven as other 

factors  may  also  be  at  play  here.  In  addition,  due  to  the  chronological 

framework that spans recent years, a further potential problem may be that of 

a lack of data and thorough research on the U.S. foreign policy decisions and 

tactics in relation to Russia.  

 
 
 
 
1.4.6. Paper Outline  

24 

The  rest  of  the paper is organised as follows. Section two provides historical 

and  theoretical  background  of  the  subtopics to set the backbone of the topic. 

Democratic  and  Republican  narratives  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and 

Russia are coded, constructed, compared and analysed in Section three via the 

application of the method of narrative analysis. Research results are presented 

and  analysed  in  Section four, alongside discussion, limitations, shortcomings 

and  concluding  remarks  on  the  conducted  research,  followed  by  the  final 

conclusion in Section five.  

 
 
 
2. Historical & Theoretical Background 

2.1. U.S. Party Polarisation as a Divisive Political Force  

25 

Few  notions  within  the  political  scene  of  the  United  States  have  had  such  a 

divisive  effect  on  politics  as  party  polarisation.  Historically,  the  structure  of 

the U.S. political landscape presupposed a dichotomy that manifested itself in 

a 

two-party  system.  This  non-proportional  system,  composed  of  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican  Party,  inherently  juxtaposes  the  views 

of  Democrats  and  Republicans,  putting  them  in  a  situation  of  a  nearly 

permanent ideological confrontation. Being one of the key features of the U.S. 

politics  and  having  been  increasing  in  intensity  over  the  past  decades,  party 

polarisation  largely  came  to  define  not  only  the domestic policy of the U.S., 

but also its foreign policy. As such, party polarisation is a somewhat powerful 

phenomenon,  whose  intricacies  have  to  be  closely  examined  in  order  to 

understand the way in which it exudes influence on foreign policy decisions. 

Firstly,  to  reiterate  what  has  been  stated  above,  polarisation  implies  an 

ideological  divide  between  two  particular  groups  who  hold  polar  opposite 

views  on  the  issues,  and,  in  accordance  with  the  spatial  theory  by  Downs 

(1957),  can  be  positioned  alongside  a  left-right  spectrum.  In  the  case  of  the 

U.S.  political  landscape,  the  left  side  of  the  spectrum  is  represented  by  the 

Democratic Party, while the right side is represented by the Republican Party, 

with  a  substantial  divergence  existing  between  them.  This  divergence, 

manifesting  itself  in  the  notion  of  party  polarisation,  can  be  attributed  to  a 

plethora of factors, including the diverse ideologies and values, the concept of 

affective  polarisation  (Iyengar  et  al.,  2012),  which  generates  both  positive 

feelings  towards  one’s  own  party  and  negative  sentiments  towards  the 

opposing  party,  as  well  as  the  notion  of  partisanship,  which  is  driven  by 

people’s  strong  bias  towards  one’s  own  party  and  a  prejudiced  view  of  the 

opposing  party  (McCarty,  2019).  While  polarisation  may,  indeed,  be 

subdivided  into  ideological  and  affective one, this paper primarily looks into 

 
 
26 

ideological  polarisation  with  a  minor  emphasis  on  affective polarisation as a 

contributing 

factor.  Being  closely 

related 

to  affective  polarisation, 

partisanship is also within the scope of this paper as it is a crucial component 

of  party  polarisation.  To  sum  up, the U.S. party polarisation is an expression 

of  the  ideological  divide  between  the  left-wing  Democratic  Party  and  the 

right-wing  Republican  Party,  which  may  also  be  aggravated  by  partisanship 

and affective polarisation. 

Secondly,  the  recent  trend  has  been  that  of  an  exponentially  rising  party 

polarisation  within  the  United  States,  largely  splitting  the  country  into  two 

political  camps.  Starting  from  the  1970s,  both  Pew  Research  Center  (2022) 

and  McCarty  (2019)  indicate  a  rise  in  party  polarisation  in  the  U.S.,  with  a 

particular  example  of  the  polarised  U.S.  Congress,  where  both  parties 

consistently  deviated  from  the  ideological  center.  By  2014,  92%  of 

Republicans were to the right of the median Democrat and 94% of Democrats 

were  to  the  left  of  the  median  Republican,  indicating  an  exponential  gap 

between  the  two  parties  (Pew  Research  Center,  2014).  What  is  more,  Pew 

Research  Center  (2014)  indicated  a  rise  in  partisan  antipathy,  with  mutual 

hostilities increasing between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party, 

exacerbating the degree of polarisation. While the U.S. party polarisation has 

not  always  been  high,  with  McCarty  (2019)  stating  that  the  20th  century 

witnessed  a  rather  low  level  of  polarisation  mostly  due  to  a  post-WWII 

bipartisan  consensus  and an absence of certain issues that are now polarising 

politics, it has evidently been accelerating over the past years, culminating in 

a  rather  tense  and  divisive  U.S.  presidential  race  of 2024. What can account 

for this dynamic is a complex interplay of factors, including, apart from a rise 

in affective polarisation and partisanship, the emergence of social and cultural 

issues  on  which  the  stances  of  Democrats  and  Republicans  diverge.  To 

provide  an  example,  Vail  (2014)  found  an  explicit  correlation  between  an 

increasing  presence  of  cultural  issues,  such  as  abortion  rights,  within  the 

 
 
27 

political discourse and a rise in polarisation in the United States. Specifically, 

Vail  (2014)  finds  that  the  Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican  Party  have 

been  experiencing  a  rising polarisation between 1952 and 2012 in relation to 

issues concerning women. Currently, the more culturally and socially divisive 

issues  surface  in  the  modern  world,  the  more  the  parties  are  drifting  apart, 

which  has  substantial  implications  for  the  governance  of  the  country  as  the 

paper will further discuss. 

Finally,  party  polarisation  has  far-reaching  consequences  for  a  myriad  of 

issues  and  entities,  including  all  three  branches  of  the  government,  namely, 

executive,  legislative  and  judicial  (Lee,  2015).  As  such,  the  president,  the 

Congress,  with  its  House  of  Representatives  and  the  Senate,  as  well  as  the 

Supreme  Court  are  all,  in  one  way  or  another,  influenced  by  party 

polarisation.  One  of  the  most  common  manifestations  of  such  party 

polarisation is a legislative gridlock, which represents a policy stalemate with 

the legislative process being suspended and the Congress being unable to pass 

policies,  and  which  Jones  (2001)  closely  associated  with  party  polarisation. 

Similarly, Blackman (2016) argued that the Congress loses its power to solve 

major  issues  as  its  internal  polarisation  intensifies.  These  “unfavourable 

political  winds”,  as  stated  by  Young  (2014,  p.992),  have  significant 

consequences for both domestic policies of the U.S. and its. foreign policy. Of 

particular  importance  to  this  paper,  however,  is  the  effect  of  such  party 

polarisation on the U.S. foreign policy formation specifically. As parties tend 

to  take  contradictory  stances  on a wide array of issues, ranging from climate 

change  to  the  view  of  NATO  and  Ukraine,  the  party  in  power  largely 

determines the course of the U.S. foreign policy as it sees fit. One of the most 

striking  examples  of  this  is  the  Paris  Agreement  which  was  unilaterally 

ratified  by  Barack  Obama  (the  Democratic  Party)  in  2016,  with  Donald 

Trump  (the  Republican  Party)  unilaterally  withdrawing  from  it  in  2017 

(Durney,  2017).  On  the  first  day  of  the  Democratic  Party  return to power in 

 
 
28 

2021,  however,  Joseph  Biden  returned  the  United  States  to  the  Paris 

Agreement.  This  is,  however,  a  rare  case  of  where  an  executive  was  able to 

unilaterally enact a policy. In most cases, per contra, foreign policy is devised 

under  the  influence  of  both  legislative  and  executive  branches.  The  Ukraine 

crisis,  for  example,  is  one  such  case,  with  Pew  Research  Center  (2024) 

finding  an  increasing  partisan  divergence  between  the  Democratic Party and 

the  Republican  Party  with  regard  to  NATO  and  Ukraine.  Particularly, 

Republicans  view  the  U.S.  membership  in  NATO  more  negatively  than 

Democrats, in addition to being more negatively inclined towards giving more 

aid  to  Ukraine  than  the  democrats  (Pew  Research  Center,  2024).  This 

exemplifies  the  impediment  to  the  production  of  a  coherent,  unilateral 

response to the Ukraine crisis, dividing Democrats and Republicans as to how 

it  should  be  handled  as  well  as  to  what  foreign  policy  approach  should  be 

applied vis-à-vis Russia, as the paper discusses in more detail below.  

To conclude, party polarisation is a complex phenomenon that has essentially 

pervaded  the  political  scene  of  the  U.S.  for  years,  dividing  it  into  two 

ideologically  diverse  political  camps.  In  recent  years,  however,  party 

polarisation  in  the  U.S.  has  intensified,  with  bipartisanship,  which  is  a 

consensus  between  two  opposing  parties,  becoming  a  virtually  non-existent 

concept  as  little  to  no  consensus  can  be  reached  between  Democrats  and 

Republicans neither on domestic nor on foreign issues. Such an intensification 

of  party  polarisation  influences  the  operations  of  the  government’s  three 

branches  and  is  prone  to  producing  a  legislative  gridlock,  leaving  the 

Congress  suspended  and  unable  to  function  properly.  What  is  more, 

polarisation  leads  to  contrasting  foreign  policy  approaches,  depending  on 

which  of  the  two  parties  is  presently  in  power,  as  exemplified  by  the  Paris 

Agreement  and  the  Ukraine  crisis.  Therefore,  it can be inferred that the U.S. 

party  polarisation  has  become  a  truly  divisive  force  that  is  determining  the 

United States’ course of action in many respects, including its foreign policy.  

 
 
29 

2.2.  U.S.  Party  Polarisation  as  an  Intervening  Variable  in  the  U.S. 

Foreign Policy 

Having  looked  at  the notion of polarisation broadly, it became evident that it 

represents  a powerful political force that is able to influence various political 

agenda.  More  specifically,  however,  the  ability of the U.S. party polarisation 

to  influence  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  decisions  should  be  outlined  so  as  to 

prove  its  applicability  to  the  topic  of  foreign  policy.  By  rendering  an 

understanding  of  the  precise  way  in  which  polarisation  influences  foreign 

policy decisions, this will aid in the further conduction of the research on the 

topic. To assist with this, the theory of neoclassical realism, which, in addition 

to  looking  at  systemic  incentives,  takes  into  account  domestic  factors  as 

intervening  variables  in  the  formulation  of  foreign  policy  of  a  state,  will  be 

applied.  

Firstly, it might appear counterintuitive to take the U.S. party polarisation as a 

variable  in  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  formation  due  to  it  being  a  matter  of 

domestic affairs. In spite of this fact, the U.S. party polarisation does, indeed, 

act  as  an  intervening  variable  in  formulation  of  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  if 

looked at through the prism of neoclassical realism of Rose (1998). By taking 

into  account  both  systemic  incentives  (independent  variable)  and  internal 

factors  (intervening  variable),  neoclassical  realism  renders  a  comprehensive 

understanding of how the foreign policy of a state is shaped by both domestic 

and  foreign  state  of  affairs.  As  is  evident  in  figure  1,  this  paper  implements 

neoclassical realism by taking into consideration the 2022- 2024 international 

environment  of  2022-2024 as systemic incentives (independent variable) and 

the  U.S.  party  polarisation  as  an  internal  factor  (intervening variable) with a 

view  to  seeing  how  the  latter  impacts  the  formulation  of  the  U.S.  foreign 

policy  in  relation  to  Russia  within  the  context  of  the  former.  Of  particular 

importance is the type II neoclassical realism (Ripsman et al., 2016), which is 

 
 
 
30 

usually  associated  with  neoclassical  realism  of  Rose  (1998)  and  which 

highlights  the cruciality of considering both internal and external factors of a 

state  in  the  formulation  of  its  foreign  policy.  The  U.S.  party  polarisation, 

therefore,  can  be  considered  as  an  essential  factor  in  the  way  the  U.S. 

approaches its foreign policy.  

Secondly, to showcase the role of polarisation in shaping foreign policy, it can 

be  of  great  use  to  juxtapose  the  U.S.  party  polarisation  with  the  U.S. 

bipartisan  consensus  in  order  to  see  the  strikingly  different  effects  the  two 

notions  have  on  the U.S. foreign policy. To do so, two periods from the U.S. 

history  can  be  compared,  with  one  being  characterised  by  a  bipartisan 

consensus  and  the  other  being  characterised  by  polarisation  between parties. 

Starting  with  an  example of the former, post-WWII bipartisan consensus can 

be taken into consideration. As mentioned by McCarty (2019), the U.S. party 

polarisation  was  rather  low in the aftermath of the Second World War owing 

to a consensus between two major U.S. parties (bipartisan consensus) on how 

affairs  of  the  state  should  be  approached.  Similarly,  according  to  Lynch 

(2018),  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  stance  on  Russia  in  2003-2004  exemplified 

bipartisan consensus as both Democrats and Republicans were equally hostile 

in  relation  to  Russia,  most  prominently  exemplified  by  their  unwilligness  to 

cooperate  with  the  Russian  president.  In  this  case,  the  U.S.  could  produce 

foreign  policy  that  was  supported  both  by  the  Democratic  Party  and  the 

Republican  Party,  without  experiencing  major  disagreements  between  one 

another on which course of action to take.  

By contrast, once parties disagree on a particular issue, holding polar opposite 

views  on  it,  this  polarisation  impedes  the  decision-making  process,  making 

foreign  policy  either  tough  to  implement  or  simply  inconsistent  and 

discontinuous.  Such  polarisation in the U.S. can be exemplified by the realm 

of  environmental  policy  and  the  strikingly  different  views of Democrats and 

 
 
 
31 

Republicans on how it should be approached by the U.S. As has been briefly 

mentioned  above,  the  Paris  Agreement  of  2015  is  one  of  the  most  vivid 

examples of discontinuity in the U.S. foreign policy as a result of polarisation 

between  Republicans  and  Democrats  on  the  importance  of  climate  change. 

Having  been  adopted  by  Barack  Obama  (the  Democratic  Party) in 2016, the 

Paris  Agreement  was  left  by  the  U.S.  in  2016  as  a  result  of  an  executive 

decree of Donald Trump (Republican Party) (Durney, 2017). While Joe Biden 

(the  Democratic  Party)  later  returned  the  U.S.  to  the  Paris  Agreement,  it  is 

evident that the U.S. party polarisation on crucial global issues indeed acts as 

an  intervening  variable  in  shaping  the  U.S.  foreign  policy.  As  such,  one 

inference  that  can  be  made  from  this  comparison  is  that  the  U.S.  bipartisan 

consensus  (consensus  between  the  Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican 

Party)   is  more  favourable  to  a  coherent  and  rapidly-enacted  foreign  policy 

rather than polarisation between parties. While polarisation divides the parties 

along  two  divergent  lines  of  reasoning,  stalling  decision-making  process, 

bipartisan consensus offers a common ground for foreign policy formulation. 

To conclude, while it might, indeed, appear that the U.S. party polarisation is 

a  matter  of  domestic  affairs  only and, as such, should not be considered as a 

variable  in  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  formation,  neoclassical  realism  of  Rose 

(1998)  posits  otherwise.  Being  a  prominent  domestic  force,  the  U.S.  party 

polarisation  acts  as  an  intervening  variable  in  the  formation  of  the  U.S. 

foreign  policy,  which  renders  novel  insights  into  what  domestic  factors may 

influence  the  formulation  of  the  foreign  policy  of  a  state.  While  bipartisan 

consensus  provides  favourable  conditions  for  a  unanimous  decision-making 

process  on  foreign  policy  issues,  polarisation  between  parties  can  severely 

hinder 

this  process,  making  foreign  policy  quite  discontinuous  and 

problematic in the long-term. 

 
 
 
2.3.  Evolution  of  U.S.-Russia  relations  &  U.S.  Foreign  Policy  vis-à-vis 

32 

Russia 

While not always enjoying relations of mutual trust and amiability, the United 

States and Russia have paid particular attention to one another over the course 

of  history  for  a  number  of  reasons.  At  times  out  of  fear  (as  during the Cold 

War) and at times out of a genuine desire to cooperate (as during the policy of 

the “reset”), the U.S. and Russia have been both historical allies and historical 

opponents, closely watching each other at all times. With the end of the Cold 

War rivalry and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, it was supposed that 

Russia  would  integrate  into  the  Western-led  world  order,  effectively  ending 

confrontational  relations  between  the  two  states.  This  would  not,  however, 

prove to be as smooth of a transition as expected. Since the dissolution of the 

USSR,  the  nature  of  the  relations  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  had  been 

alternating  between  confrontation  and  cooperation,  with  the  confrontation 

ultimately  prevailing  in  2022  as  a  result  of  the  Ukraine  crisis.  This  crisis 

provoked  a  drastic  shift  in  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia,  with  the 

U.S.-Russia  relations  suffering  irreparable  damage,  leaving  the  future  of  the 

U.S.-Russia relations uncertain.  

Firstly, the 20th century has been instrumental in laying the foundation for the 

future  of  the  U.S.-Russia  relations and, as such, it is worth briefly reviewing 

it.   While  being  allies  during  WWII  that  jointly defeated the Axis powers in 

1945, the United States. and Russia soon ceased being partners, with the seeds 

of  ideological  rivalry  having  been  planted  not  long  after  the  Second  World 

War ended. In the aftermath of WWII, tensions between the United States and 

the  Soviet  Union,  with  their  respective  ideologies  of  capitalism  and 

communism,  started  to  dominate  their  relations.  In  a  stark  departure  to  its 

previous policy of isolationism, the U.S. quickly recognised the Soviet Union 

(and the potential spread of communism) as a threat not only to the U.S. itself, 

but  also  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  culminated  in  president  Truman’s 

 
 
33 

proclamation of the launch of the policy of containment in 1947 in the form of 

the  Truman  Doctrine  (Nagar  et  al.,  2014).  From  that  point  forward,  the  key 

foreign  policy  goal  of the United States was to contain the Soviet Union and 

to  prevent  the  spread  of  the  communist  ideology.  As  such,  for  nearly  the 

whole  second  part  of  the  20th  century,  the  U.S.-Russian  relations  were 

characterised  by  an  ideological  confrontation  and  mutual  hostilities  within  a 

bipolar  world  order.  Of  particular  importance  to  this  paper  is the creation of 

NATO  during  this  period  in  response  to  the  communist  threat.  From  its 

foundation  in  1949,  NATO  represented  a  military  alliance  of  the  Western 

states  aimed  at  achieving  collective  security  and  containing  the  potential 

threat  from  the  Soviet  Union.  Despite  its  initial  goal  having  ceased  to  exist 

with  the  collapse  of the USSR, NATO has modified its goals and operations, 

continuing  to  exist  even with the birth of a new Russian state. Consequently, 

the  creation  of  NATO  would  largely  determine the nature of the U.S.-Russia 

relations for decades to come.  

Secondly, the dissolution of the USSR in 1991 and the overall end of the Cold 

War  marked  a  significant  geopolitical  shift  and  a  novel  stage  in  the 

U.S.-Russia  relations,  according  to  Roberts  (in  Tsygankov,  2018,  p.237).  It 

terminated the hostilities and the ideological rivalry between the U.S. and the 

Soviet  Union  that  had  permeated  the  international  system  since  the  end  of 

WWII  up  until  1991.  At  the  time,  it was proposed by Fukuyama (1992) that 

the  world  had  reached  the  “end  of  history”,  where  the  notion  of  liberal 

democracy  had  supposedly emerged as the superior form of governance with 

no  other  regime  being  able  to  challenge  it.  In  line  with  this  reasoning,  both 

being  pro-Western,  the  new  president  of  Russia,  Boris  Yeltsin,  and  the  new 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Kozyrev, started charting a new course for 

Russia,  one  where  Russia  would  supposedly  integrate  into  the  Western-led 

world  order,  adopting  democratic  and  liberal  principles.  Initially  having 

started  with hopes on both sides, this period of cooperation largely proved to 

 
 
34 

be  unsustainable.  This  happened  mostly  due  to  a  certain  mismatch  between 

the intentions and interests of Russia and the West, consequently leading to an 

ultimate  failure  of  the  Russian  attempt  to  integrate  into  the  West,  indicating 

that  the  world  was  not,  in  fact,  at  “the  end of history”. In short, the Western 

hopes  were  that  Russia  would  undergo  an  internal  transformation,  while 

Russian hopes were that the West would accept Russia as an equal partner as 

it  is.  Yet,  the  key  turning  point  became  the  potential  enlargement  of  NATO, 

which emerged as a significant point of contention and an arguable tug of war 

between  the  United  States  and Russia over the post-Soviet space. One of the 

key reasons behind this is that, according to Lynch (2016), Russia believes in 

its regional primacy in the post-Soviet space, with the West refusing to accept 

this  notion.  Therefore,  NATO  as  a  point  of  contention  has been solidified in 

the U.S.-Russia relations, making their cooperation problematic. 

Nevertheless,  as  the  hopes  that  Russia  would  integrate  into  the  Western-led 

world order have been shattered on both sides, Russia and the West, partially 

out of willingness and partially out of necessity, entered the 21st century with 

pragmatic  cooperation.  This  manifested  itself  in  cooperation  of  the U.S. and 

Russia  in  certain  areas,  such  as  counter-terrorism  agenda.  One  of  the  key 

reasons behind this was the unprecedented terrorist attacks of September 11th, 

2001  that  targeted  the  Twin  Towers  in  New  York  by  a  terrorist  group 

al-Qaeda.  By  expressing  sympathy  with  the  U.S.,  Russia  was  determined  to 

cooperate  with  it on fighting terrorism in the international system, marking a 

new  stage  in  the  U.S.-Russia  relations.  What  is  more,  in  an  unparalleled 

move,  NATO-Russia  Council  was  created  in  May 2002 as a sign of both the 

recognition  of  Russia  by  the  West  as  a  strategic  partner and the readiness of 

Russia  to  loosen  its  opposition  to  the  enlargement  of  NATO,  ultimately 

leading  to the amelioration of relations (Franekova, 2002). At the same time, 

the turn that the U.S. foreign policy took with the launch of the War on Terror 

was at odds with Russia’s view of the world order, not only effectively ending 

 
 
35 

the  cooperation  between  the  two  states  on  the  counter-terrorist  agenda,  but 

also  planting  the  seeds of future conflicts and confrontation (German, 2024). 

According to German (2024), the U.S.-Russia relations had been significantly 

impacted by the U.S. foreign policy under the George W. Bush administration 

that 

emphasised  unilateralism, 

spread  of  democracy  and 

liberal 

interventionism,  which  would  ultimately  contribute  to  the  Ukraine  crisis  of 

2024.  Prior  to  this,  NATO  emerged  as  a  point  of contention once more. The 

statement  during  the  Bucharest  Summit  of  April  2008  about  Georgia  and 

Ukraine  eventually  becoming  members  of  NATO  further  complicated  the 

relations  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia,  with  the  latter  launching  an  invasion 

into  Georgia  (German,  2024).  The  U.S.  and  Russia  attempted  to  reset  their 

relationship  in  2009-2012,  with  Barack  Obama,  president  of  the  U.S.,  and 

Dmitry  Medveded,  president  of  Russia,  focusing  on  bettering  the  relations, 

albeit,  to  little  avail  in  the  long-run,  according  to  Roberts  (in  Tsygankov, 

2018, p.247). With the return of Vladimir Putin to the presidency of Russia in 

2012  and  the  renewed  hostilities  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  over  the 

post-Soviet  space,  there  was  little  hope  for  improvement  in  their  relations. 

Therefore,  with the clash of interests over the expansion of NATO remaining 

at the heart of the tensions between the U.S. and Russia, the relations between 

the  two  states  ultimately  soured  due  to  the  inability  to  resolve,  among other 

things,  the  Ukraine  crisis on mutually acceptable terms, leaving the U.S. and 

Russia locked in confrontational relations.  

Distantly originating from the 2008 Bucharest Summit (and the proclamations 

of  Ukraine  potentially  joining  NATO), as well as from the 2013 Euromaidan 

(which  culminated  in  the  installation  of  a  pro-Western  government,  making 

Ukraine  joining  NATO  ever  more  likely),  the  question  of  Ukraine  has  long 

been  a  point  of  contention  in  the  U.S.-Russia  relations.  As  the  Russian 

incorporation of Crimea took place in 2014, it has once again put the U.S. and 

Russia  at  loggerheads.  Notably,  Ukraine  emerged  as  a  polarising  factor  not 

 
 
36 

only  in  the  U.S.-Russia  relations,  but  also  within  the  U.S.  itself.  American 

scholars  differ  in  their  views  on  the  crisis,  with  realists,  such  as  John  J. 

Mearshimer,  and  liberals,  such as Michael McFaul and Stephen Sestanovich, 

taking  polar  opposite  views  on  the  roots  of  the  crisis.  Particularly, 

Mearsheimer (2014) claims that the crisis was initially generated by a number 

of  actions  by  the  West,  namely,  the  expansion  of  NATO  and  the  European 

Union to the east, as well as the promotion of democracy outside of the West. 

Essentially  representing  a  clash  between  the  Russian  proponents  of  realism 

and  the  Western  proponents  of  liberalism,  the  Ukraine  crisis,  according  to 

Mearsheimer  (2014),  had  been  generated  by  a  reluctance  of  the  latter  to 

acknowledge  the  security  concerns  of  the  former.  McFaul  &  Sestanovich 

(2014),  however,  in  response  to  Mearsheimer  (2014),  take  a  polar  opposite 

view, stating that the enlargement of NATO cannot possibly be considered as 

a reason behind the crisis due to it having happened a long time ago. Instead, 

McFaul  &  Sestanovich  (2014)  propose  that  it  was  the  Russian  leader’s 

personal  choice  to  show  the  U.S.  in  a  bad  light,  so  as  to  boost  popularity 

domestically,  that  generated  the  crisis  in  the  first  place.  In  response  to  this 

critique,  Mearsheimer  (2014)  points  to  the  fact  that  it  was  this  particular 

liberal  logic  that  omitted  the  security  concerns  of  Russia  that  initiated  the 

crisis,  making  Russia  operate  out of fear. Considering such distinct views on 

the  same  crisis  in  academia  and,  as  has  been  briefly  mentioned  above,  the 

U.S. politicians are no less polarised with regard to the Ukraine crisis than the 

scholars, which has implications for how the U.S. approaches Russia.  

It is notable that with the U.S. further intending on welcoming the post-Soviet 

states  into  NATO  and  Russia  striving  to  protect  its  dominance  in  the 

post-Soviet  space,  the  peak  of  this  conflict  has  been  reached  in  2022  with 

Russia  declaring  a  special  military  operation  in  Ukraine.  Representing  a 

culmination  of  decades-long  tensions  between  the U.S. and Russia, the 2022 

Ukraine  crisis  has  provoked  drastic  changes  in  their  respective  foreign 

 
 
37 

policies  towards  one  another,  significantly  impacting  the  nature  of  the 

U.S.-Russia relations. By effectively putting to a halt all previous attempts to 

cooperate as well as destroying any hopes of potential cooperation in the near 

future,  mutually  beneficial  relations  became  a  virtually  unattainable  goal for 

the  two  states.  Essentially  being  locked  in  a  confrontation,  the  U.S.  and 

Russia  are  waging  a  proxy  war,  characterised  by  hybrid warfare (defined by 

Hoffman  (2007)  as  a  combination  of  non-conventional  and  conventional 

elements  of  warfare)  and  by 

the  existential  nature  of  the  conflict 

(Mearsheimer,  2023).  According  to  German  (2024),  the  2022  Ukraine  crisis 

has  prompted  an  alteration  in  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  approach  towards 

Russia,  effectively  ending  all  of  the  previous  strategies,  embarking,  instead, 

upon  a  strategy  of  directly  diminishing  the  strategic  power  of  Russia.  Once 

again,  however,  the  U.S.  stance  on  the  crisis  differs  due  to  the  party 

polarisation  over  the  Ukraine  crisis.  According  to  Pew  Research  Center 

(2024), the majority of Republicans state that it is not the responsibility of the 

U.S.  to  provide aid to Ukraine and support it in the crisis, while the majority 

of  Democrats  believe  that  the  U.S.  either  provides  sufficient  support  or  not 

enough  of  it.  Whether  such  polarisation,  however,  exudes  influence  on  the 

U.S.  foreign  policy  formation  in  relation  to  Russia  is  the  subject  of  the 

following chapter.  

In  conclusion,  the  United  States  and  Russia  have  shared  a  long,  complex 

history, with their relations being fuelled, among other things, by the remnants 

of the Cold War rivalry. The dissolution of the USSR in 1991 supposedly had 

to put an end to the confrontation between the U.S. and Russia, with the latter 

willing  to  integrate  into  the  Western-led  world  order.  Yet, while this attempt 

of  integration  was  genuinely  made,  a  clash  of  interests  prevailed  in  their 

relations,  leading, ultimately, to the deterioration of the relations between the 

U.S.  and  Russia.  One  of  the  most  prominent  factors  that  contributed  to  this 

deterioration  on  numerous  occasions  were  the  strikingly  divergent  views  of 

 
 
38 

NATO  and  its  enlargement  into  the  post-Soviet  space.  While  some  attempts 

were  made  to  reconcile  these  differences  (e.g.  the  NATO-Russia  Council  of 

2002),  the  U.S.  and  Russia  were  essentially  unable  to  reach  a  consensus, 

culminating in the 2022 Ukraine crisis.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 

3. U.S. Party Polarisation with regard to Ukraine Crisis & Russia 

Having thoroughly analysed the concept of polarisation within the U.S. party 

politics and the evolution of the U.S.-Russia relations, this chapter will focus 

on  analysing  the  specifics  of  attitudes  and  mentions  by  Democrats  and 

Republicans  of  the  2022-2024  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia  in  order  to 

understand  the  extent  of  their  polarisation  over  the  issues  and  the  extent  to 

which it exudes influence on the U.S. foreign policy towards Russia. Below is 

the table of foreign policy objectives and measures, mentioned by Democrats 

and  Republicans,  that  was  generated  via  coding  of  the  2024  presidential 

debate  of  Kamala  Harris  and  Donald Trump, vice presidential debate of Tim 

Walz  and  JD  Vance,  Democratic  convention  speech  of  Kamala  Harris  and 

Republican  convention  speech  of  Donald  Trump.  Prior  to  delving  into  the 

nuanced discussion of the results, it should be noted that while the talk of the 

Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia  is  present  on  both  Democratic  and  Republican 

sides,  the  rhetoric  employed  by  them  with  regard  to  this  topic  is  highly 

polarised. Notably, neither of the parties would like for the conflict to persist. 

Thus,  while  employing  polar  opposite  rhetoric  with  regard  to  Ukraine  and 

Russia,  Democrats and Republicans share an implicit notion that the Ukraine 

crisis has to be put to a halt, albeit via different tactics. This, in turn, signifies 

that  whether  Democrats  or  Republicans  are  in  power  will  produce  different 

implications for the U.S. foreign policy towards Russia.  

Foreign Policy Objectives & Measures                 

Figure 3 

 
40 

Note:  the  numbers  in  the  table  represent  the  number  of  times  particular 

foreign policy objectives and measures were mentioned during the speeches. 

3.1. Democratic Perspective on 2022-2024 Ukraine Crisis & Russia 

Having coded the 2024 presidential and vice presidential debates in the U.S., 

as  well  as  the  convention  speeches  of  Democratic  and Republican nominees 

(figure  3, appendix A), it is now possible, as such, to proceed with analysing 

the  way  Democrats  view  the  2022-2024  Ukraine  crisis and the way they see 

Russia  should  be  approached  within  this  context.  In  order  to  do  this,  the 

method  of  narrative  analysis,  outlined  in  the  methodological section, will be 

employed  here  to  construct  the  narrative  of  Democrats  with  regard  to  the 

Ukraine crisis and how they see the way Russia should be approached in U.S. 

foreign policy.  

Firstly, to briefly reiterate what has been stated above, the construction of the 

Democratic  narrative  has  been  done  via  coding  the  2024  presidential  debate 

of Kamala Harris and Donald Trump, the 2024 vice presidential debate of Tim 

Walz and JD Vance and the primary convention speech of Kamala Harris. The 

findings  from  figure  3  illustrate  that  Kamala  Harris  is  both  promoting  and 

 
 
 
 
41 

supporting  the  provision  of  aid  to  Ukraine,  with  an  overall  positive  view  of 

NATO  allies and Europe at large. While she does talk about the stakes of the 

crisis,  which,  according  to  her,  lie  in  America's  ability  to  maintain 

international rules and the position of the U.S. as a global leader of the liberal, 

democratic  world,  she  neither  explicitly  mentions  the  resolution of the crisis 

nor the need to constrain Russia. Her stance on the Ukraine crisis and Russia, 

as  such,  is  rather  consistent  and  subtle.  Notably,  Harris  is  highly  consistent 

when  it  comes  to  talking  about  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia.  Figure  3 

showcases  the  number  of  times  certain  topics  have  been  mentioned  by 

Kamala Harris  in both her debate and her convention speech, with her talking 

equally about aid to Ukraine, NATO allies and the stakes of the crisis. When it 

comes  to  the  2024  vice  presidential  debate,  however,  Tim  Walz  mentioned 

neither  the  Ukraine  crisis  nor  Russia  in  his  speech,  focusing,  rather,  on 

domestic issues and the U.S. foreign policy with regard to the Middle East. It 

can be stated, therefore, that while Democrats do have a stance on the Ukraine 

crisis  and  Russia,  believing  that  the  former  has  to  be  supported  and  that the 

U.S. should emerge as a global leader in the crisis, they are not aggressive in 

their approach to the topic, avoiding overly harsh measures within the context 

of the U.S. presidential and vice presidential elections. 

Secondly, it is now possible to construct the Democratic narrative with regard 

to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia,  based  on  the  aforementioned  findings, 

employing  the  narrative  method  outlined  in  the  methodological  section. It is 

quite clear that Democrats take the Ukraine crisis seriously, stressing the need 

to continue providing support to Ukraine so as not to let it fall. Their ultimate 

goals  are,  as  such,  defending  democratic  and  liberal  values,  with  the  U.S. 

protecting international norms in the international system as a global leader of 

the  democratic  world.  None  of  the  Democrats,  however,  talk  about  concrete 

measures that they wish to take in relation to Russia so as to end the crisis that 

they  deem  to  be  unlawful  and  morally  wrong.  This  can  potentially  be 

 
 
42 

explained by the emplotment of the context (figure 2) with a win-lose setting 

of  the  U.S.  presidential  elections,  where  each  leader  bases  their  line  of 

reasoning  on  appealing  to  the  civil  society.  Democrats,  as  such,  are  not 

incentivised to talk about ending the crisis. Rather, they emerge as democratic 

leaders,  defending  democratic  and  liberal  values,  as  their  supporters  would 

expect  them  to.  While  Democrats  have  applied  sanctions  and  international 

pressure on Russia so as to weaken its ability to influence Ukraine previously, 

they  have  avoided  mentioning  any  steps  they  wish  to  take  against  Russia  in 

the  future.  Therefore,  the  Democratic  narrative  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine 

crisis  and  Russia  represents  a  rigid  commitment  to  supporting  Ukraine, 

thereby  defending  democratic  and liberal ideals, while avoiding overly harsh 

measures due to the 2024 U.S. presidential elections being at stake. 

To  conclude,  construction  of  the  Democratic  narrative  via  coding  the  2024 

U.S.  presidential  and  vice  presidential  elections,  alongside  a  Democratic 

convention speech of Kamala Harris, allowed to get an understanding of how 

Democrats view the Ukraine crisis and Russia. While taking a rigid stance on 

supporting Ukraine and providing aid, Democrats mentioned neither the steps 

to  potentially  resolve  the  crisis  nor  their  foreign  policy  objectives  towards 

Russia.  All  of  these have to be considered within the win-lose context of the 

U.S.  presidential  elections,  where  Democrats’  key  goals  are  to  defend 

democratic values and, ultimately, get elected. 

3.2. Republican Perspective on 2022-2024 Ukraine Crisis & Russia 

Having  constructed  and  analysed  the  Democratic  narrative  with  regard  to 

Russia and the Ukraine crisis, this section will proceed with constructing and 

analysing  the  Republican  narrative  on  the  same  issues.  In  particular,  this 

section  will  use  the  results  of  coding  the  2024  presidential  and  vice 

presidential  debates  in  the  U.S.  as well as the Republican convention speech 

 
 
 
of  Donald  Trump,  presented  in  figure  3  and  appendix  A,  in  order  to  outline 

the Republican narrative. 

43 

Firstly,  when  looking  at  the  Republican  stance  on  the  Ukraine  crisis  and 

Russia,  the  findings  from  figure  3  showcase  that  not  only  was both Ukraine 

and  Russia  mentioned  by  Trump  in  his  convention  speech  and  during  the 

debate  with  the  Democratic  nominee  Kamala  Harris,  but  that they were also 

mentioned numerous times by him. Notably, Trump’s convention speech was 

quite  mild  in  this  sense,  mentioning  a  reduction  of  aid  to  Ukraine  once, 

stressing  the  need  to  resolve  the  crisis  once  and  highlighting  the  stakes 

involved  once.  During the debate with Harris, however, Trump demonstrated 

a  more  aggressive  and  thorough approach to the conflict, stating alike points 

up  to  four  times.  Not  only  did  Trump  express  his  unwillingness  to  keep 

sponsoring  Ukraine  (claiming  that,  instead,  Europe  and  NATO  allies  should 

invest  more,  viewing  NATO  as  underinvesting  in  the  conflict),  but  he  also 

mentioned  the  need  to  negotiate  with  Russia  in  order to resolve the conflict, 

blaming  Democrats  for  not  starting  negotiations  with  Vladimir  Putin. 

Additionally, Donald Trump has made it crystal clear that his primary goal in 

this conflict is to put it to an end, emphasising both his willingness as well as 

his ability to do so. On top of that, Trump has raised a point about the stakes 

involved  in  this  conflict  multiple  times,  stating  that it can potentially lead to 

WWIII  and  a  nuclear  catastrophe if mishandled. Similarly to the Democratic 

vice presidential nominee Tim Walz, however, neither the topic of the Ukraine 

crisis  nor  Russia’s  involvement  in  it  was  mentioned  by  JD Vance during the 

vice presidential debates. Still, it is evident from the key line of Republicans’ 

reasoning,  laid  out  by  Trump  during  the  debate  and  the  Republican 

Convention  speech,  that  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia  are,  indeed,  on  the 

agenda of Republicans, who deem it crucial to resolve the conflict as soon as 

possible. 

 
 
 
44 

Secondly,  based  on  the  aforementioned  findings  it  is not possible to proceed 

with  revealing  the Republican narrative with regard to the Ukraine crisis and 

Russia  via  the  implementation  of  the  narrative  analysis,  laid  out  in  the 

methodological  section.  As  is  evident  from  the  findings,  Republicans  take  a 

relatively  harsh  approach  to the crisis, emphasising both the need to put it to 

an  end  as  well  as  the  need  to  reduce  the  role  the  U.S.  plays  in  supporting 

Ukraine.  Both  of  these  goals  correspond with Republicans’ ultimate stake of 

winning  the  U.S.  presidential elections, as both the former and the latter will 

aid in freeing up resources and reorienting them to what Republicans view as 

top foreign policy concerns (such as illegal immigration and a trade war with 

China),  as  well  as  in  preventing  a  potential  WWIII  and  nuclear  disaster. 

Republicans  are  willing  to  do  so  via  conducting  negotiations  with  Vladimir 

Putin of Russia, emphasising that Democrats were not prone to doing so since 

the very start of the conflict. Thus, the Republican narrative with regard to the 

Ukraine crisis and Russia highlights the need to resolve the conflict as soon as 

possible,  both  engaging  Russia  in  a  diplomatic  dialogue  as  well  as  reducing 

the provision of the U.S. support to Ukraine, with an ultimate goal of shifting 

the  U.S.  focus  on  other foreign policy concerns that Republicans deem to be 

more crucial.  

In  conclusion,  the  aforementioned reconstruction of the Republican narrative 

with  regard  to the Ukraine crisis and Russia via coding the 2024 presidential 

and vice presidential debates, as well as the Republican Convention speech of 

Donald  Trump  rendered  a  nuanced  understanding  of  the  way  Republicans 

view the issues at hand. In particular, Republicans take the need to resolve the 

Ukraine crisis seriously. Believing it to be in the best interest of the U.S. and 

the world at large, they stress the need to negotiate with Russia in reaching a 

deal to settle the crisis, cautioning against a potential eruption of WWII and a 

nuclear catastrophe. Once settled, however, Republicans believe that the U.S. 

 
 
will  be  able  to  reorient  its  resources  to  other  foreign policy concerns, which 

Republicans deem to be more vital to the national interest of the U.S. 

45 

3.3.  2022-2024  Ukraine  Crisis  as  a  Polarising  Factor  in  U.S.  Foreign 

Policy towards Russia  

Taking  into  consideration  all  of  the  aforementioned  findings,  including  the 

Democratic and the Republican narratives, it is now possible to proceed with 

analysing them via juxtaposing the two narratives. Such juxtaposition will aid 

in  answering  the  research  question  of  “to  what  extent  do  the  views  of  the 

Democratic Party and the Republican Party diverge with regard to the current 

Ukraine  crisis  and  how,  if  at  all,  did  it  influence  the  formation  of  the  U.S. 

foreign  policy  towards  Russia  within  the  context  of  the  Ukraine  crisis  in 

2022-2024?”  as  well  as  to  test  the  initial  hypothesis  of  “the  views  of  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican Party diverge significantly with regard 

to  the  Ukraine  crisis,  with  this  discrepancy  being  a  prominent  intervening 

variable in the formation of the U.S foreign policy towards Russia within the 

context of the 2022-2024 Ukraine crisis.” 

Firstly,  in  comparing  the  Democratic  and  the Republican narratives vis-à-vis 

the Ukraine crisis and Russia, it is evident that they differ in their approach to 

both  Ukraine  and  Russia. The Democratic narrative expresses full support of 

Ukraine,  advocating  for  provision  of  aid to Ukraine and viewing NATO as a 

key ally with which the U.S. should jointly work when it comes to the crisis. 

What is essentially at stake here, from the point of view of Democrats, is the 

image  of  the  U.S.  as  a  leader  of  the  democratic,  liberal  world that is able to 

protect  these  values  around the globe. The Republican narrative, by contrast, 

disregards  the  provision  of  aid  to  Ukraine and deems it necessary for NATO 

to  invest  more  in  the  crisis,  with  the  U.S.  reorienting  its  resources  to  other 

foreign  policy  concerns,  such  as  illegal  immigration  and  a  trade  war  with 

China.  Republicans  believe  that  the  stakes  of  the  crisis  are  rather  high, 

 
 
 
46 

pointing  to  a  potential  WWIII  and  a  nuclear  disaster.  When  it  comes  to  the 

U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia  in  this  context,  the  Democratic  and  the 

Republican  narratives  diverge  once  more.  While  they  were  not  mentioning 

Russia during the presidential race, Democrats omit the possibility of holding 

talks  with  Russia  to  resolve  the  crisis.  While  not  explicitly  stated,  it  can  be 

presumed  that  the  Democratic  narrative  does  not  allow  for  negotiations  to 

take  place  when  the  crisis  has  already  greatly  escalated.  The  Republican 

narrative, however, emphasises negotiations with Russia as a key to resolving 

the  crisis.  In addition to being willing to hold talks with Russia, Republicans 

stress  their  resolve  to  end  the  crisis  as  soon  as  possible.  It  should  be 

acknowledged that these differences present in the rhetoric influence the U.S. 

foreign  policy.  One  inference  that  can  be  made  from  this  is  that the rhetoric 

used  by  Democrats  and  Republicans  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and 

Russia  differs  substantially,  pointing  to  their  polar  opposite  stances  on  the 

way  the  crisis  should  be  approached  which  influences  the  foreign  policy  of 

the U.S. 

Secondly,  such  a  striking  difference  between  the  two  narratives  corresponds 

with  what  Oppermann  &  Spencer  in  Mello  &  Ostermann  (2023)  classify  as 

competing  narratives.  According  to  Oppermann  &  Spencer  in  Mello  & 

Ostermann (2023), competing narratives presuppose distinct interpretations of 

a  foreign  policy  of  a  state,  locking  the  two  sides  not only in a confrontation 

but  also  in  a  competition  for  superior  influence  in  the  foreign  policy 

discourse.  In  addition to the aforementioned clashes between the Democratic 

and  the  Republican  narrative,  a  lot  of  mutual  accusations  and  a  constant 

blame  game  (as  mentioned  in  figure  2,  emplotment)  were  found  during  the 

coding  of 

the  speeches  of  Democrats  and  Republicans.  Ideological 

polarisation,  as  such,  is  quite  prevalent  between  the  Democratic  and  the 

Republican  parties,  with  affective  polarisation also contributing to the divide 

between  them.  On  top  of  that,  partisanship  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the 

 
 
47 

contemporary  U.S.  party  polarisation,  where  elections  themselves  are 

becoming more of an attack on the opposing party rather than being a chance 

to showcase the party’s own positions, interests and objectives.  

Finally,  it  is  now  possible  to  provide  an  answer  to  the  proposed  research 

question  and  to  test  the  initial  hypothesis.  Taking  all  of  the  aforementioned 

findings  into  consideration,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  views  of  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican Party diverge significantly with regard 

to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  this  has  major  implications  for  how  the  U.S. 

approaches  Russia  in  its  foreign  policy.  Thus,  as  the  Democratic  and  the 

Republican  narratives  differ  with  regard  to  Russia,  with  the  latter  being 

willing  to  negotiate  with  it  and  the  former  refraining  from  negotiations,  this 

has an impact on the course of the foreign policy of the U.S. towards Russia. 

The hypothesis, therefore, is proven as the views of the Democratic Party and 

the  Republican  Party  do  diverge  significantly  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine 

crisis,  with  this  discrepancy  being  a  prominent  intervening  variable  in  the 

formation  of  the  U.S  foreign policy towards Russia within the context of the 

2022-2024  Ukraine  crisis.  It  should  be  acknowledged,  however,  that  even  if 

Republicans  do  decide  to  embark  upon  negotiations  with  Russia  concerning 

the  Ukraine  crisis,  it  is  highly  doubtful that the economic sanctions imposed 

on  Russia  will  be  lifted.  As  such,  it  may  be  said  that  the  tone  with  which 

Democrats  and  Republicans  approach  Russia  within  the  context  of  the 

Ukraine  crisis  does  differ  and  that  this  changes  the  substance  of  the  U.S. 

foreign policy towards Russia.  

To  conclude,  when  compared,  the  Democratic  and the Republican narratives 

differ  substantially  when  it  comes  to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  the  approach  to 

Russia.  While  Democrats  are  in  favour  of  supporting  Ukraine  and  working 

closely  with  NATO  to  provide  help,  Republicans  are  more  averse  to  the 

provision  of  aid,  stressing,  on  the  other  hand,  the  need  to  negotiate  with 

 
 
 
48 

Russia  to  reach  a  deal.  As  such  competing  narratives  encompass  polar 

opposite  views,  fueled,  among  other  things,  by  mutual  animosity  and 

partisanship,  this  has  major  influence  on  the  formation  of  the  U.S.  foreign 

policy towards Russia. Still, it should be noted that while Republicans may be 

more  prone  to  negotiations  with  Russia  than  Democrats,  Russia  still  faces  a 

plethora of sanctions and a general exclusion from the Western world.  

 
 
 
 
4.Research Results & Concluding Remarks 

4.1. Research Results 

49 

This paper had set out to trace the influence of the U.S. party polarisation on 

the  U.S.  foreign  policy  formation  in  relation  to  Russia  within  the  context of 

the  2022-2024  Ukraine  crisis.  This  was  primarily done via applying the lens 

of  neoclassical  realism  (Rose,  1998)  and  the  method  of  narrative analysis in 

order  to  understand  the  way  the  U.S.  party  polarisation  could  shift  the  U.S. 

approach  to  Russia.  As  a  result  of  the research, it was found that Democrats 

and  Republicans  do,  indeed,  view  the  approach  to  both  Ukraine  and  Russia 

differently,  which  has  implications  for  the  way  the  U.S.  foreign  policy 

towards Russia is implemented. 

Initially,  having  conducted  a  nuanced  overview  of  the  previous  literature  on 

the  topic,  the following research question was formulated: To what extent do 

the views of the Democratic Party and the Republican Party with regard to the 

Ukraine  crisis  diverge and how, if at all, did it influence the formation of the 

U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia within the context of the current Ukraine 

crisis  in  2022-2024?  With  the  hypothesis  being  that  the  views  of  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican Party diverge significantly with regard 

to  the  Ukraine  crisis,  with  this  discrepancy  having  been  a  prominent 

intervening variable in the formation of the U.S foreign policy towards Russia 

within  the  context  of  the  Ukraine  crisis  between  2022-2024.  In  order  to 

answer the proposed research question and to test the hypothesis, the method 

of  narrative  analysis  was  used  to  reconstruct  the  Democratic  and  the 

Republican  narratives  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia.  It  was 

found  that  the  Democratic  narrative  presupposes  a  constant  flow  of  aid  to 

Ukraine and the U.S. working closely with NATO to help Ukraine as a leader 

of  the  liberal,  democratic  world.  The  Republican  narrative,  by  contrast, 

criticises  the  U.S.  involvement  in  the  crisis,  stating  that,  instead,  NATO 

countries should be responsible for providing aid to Ukraine, not the U.S. As 

 
 
50 

for  the  foreign  policy  approach  to  Russia,  Republicans  advocate  for holding 

negotiations  with  the  Russian  president  in  order  to  resolve the crisis that the 

Republicans deem to be rather dangerous. While it was, indeed, found that the 

Democratic and the Republican narratives diverge significantly with regard to 

both  Russia  and  Ukraine,  this  divergence  goes  beyond pure rhetoric used by 

both Republicans and Democrats, influencing the U.S. foreign policy towards 

Russia. 

In  answering  the  research  question,  taking  all  of  the  aforementioned  points 

into consideration, it can be stated that the views of the Democratic Party and 

the  Republican  Party  diverge  significantly  with  regard  to  the  Ukraine  crisis, 

yet  this  has  little  implications  for  how  the  U.S.  approaches  Russia  in  its 

foreign  policy.  The  hypothesis,  as  such,  was  proven  as  the  views  of  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican Party diverge significantly with regard 

to  the  Ukraine  crisis,  with  this  discrepancy  being  a  prominent  intervening 

variable in the formation of the U.S foreign policy towards Russia within the 

context  of  the  2022-2024  Ukraine  crisis.  For  now, as such, Ukraine does act 

as  a  polarising  factor  within  the  U.S.  political  scene,  influencing  the  U.S. 

approach  to Russia. While Republicans express their willingness to negotiate 

with  Russia, 

they  do  not,  however,  mention  revoking  sanctions  or 

ameliorating  bilateral  relations  with  Russia.  One  inference  that  can  be made 

from  this  is  that  the  case  of  Russia  leads  to  polarisation between Democrats 

and  Republicans,  producing  different  foreign  policy  initiatives,  yet,  some 

aspects, such as those concerning sanctions, remain the same. 

To  conclude,  it  was  initially  hypothesised  that  the  polar  opposite  views  of 

Democrats  and  Republicans  on  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia  influence  the 

U.S. foreign policy to a significant extent. The research that was subsequently 

conducted  to  test  this  hypothesis  proved  it  to  be  true.  In  particular,  it  was 

found  that  as  the  Democratic  and  the  Republican  narratives  do  diverge, 

 
 
 
presenting  competing  narratives,  this  influences  the  U.S.  foreign  policy 

towards Russia within the context of the 2022-2024 Ukraine crisis. 

51 

4.2. Discussion 

When it comes to further relevance and applicability, this study is intended to 

contribute  to  the  existing  literature  on  the  U.S.  party  polarisation,  the  U.S. 

foreign policy towards Russia and the Ukraine crisis in 2022-2024, to advance 

understanding  of  the  U.S.  party  polarisation’s  influence  on  the  U.S.  foreign 

policy  towards  Russia  as  well  as  to  generate  further  research  on  the 

aforementioned topics.  

Taking  into  account  the  fact  that  this  paper  contains  an  extensive  literature 

review on the components of the research topic and a nuanced research of the 

U.S.  party  polarisation,  this  paper  may  shed  light  on  some  aspects  of  the 

concept  of  polarisation  and  its  multifaceted  nature.  When  it  comes  to  the 

U.S.-Russia  relations,  this  paper  incorporates  a  broad  historical  overview  of 

the  U.S.-Russia  relations,  highlighting  the  economic,  political  and  cultural 

decoupling  of  the  U.S.  and  Russia  as  well  as an end to the cyclical relations 

that the two states previously experienced. When combined, the research into 

the U.S. party polarisation and the U.S.-Russia relations may render a greater 

comprehension  of  how  the  U.S.  approaches  Russia  within  the context of the 

Ukraine  crisis.  Particularly,  this  paper  draws  attention  to  the  importance  of 

rhetoric  and  its  potential  to  shift  paradigms  and  to  translate  into  the  foreign 

policy  of  a  state.  The  paper,  as  such,  contributes  not  only  to  the  body  of 

literature  on  polarisation  per  se,  but  also  to  the  literature  on  the  relations 

between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  and  the  way  the  U.S.  party  polarisation  may 

influence them.  

What  is  more,  this  paper  highlights  the  fact  that  while  Democrats  and 

Republicans  are,  indeed,  polarised  over  the  Ukraine  crisis,  none  of the sides 

 
 
 
 
52 

wish  to  prolong  this  conflict.  On  the  contrary,  both  Republicans  and 

Democrats  view  tackling  the  crisis  as  being  existential  to  the  core  national 

interest of the U.S., albeit for different reasons. Nonetheless, the superior aim 

of  this  study  is  to  prompt  Republicans  and  Democrats  to  see  past  their 

differences  and  reach  a  bipartisan  consensus  on  tackling  the  Ukraine  crisis.  

As history shows, it is a bipartisan consensus in the U.S. that usually produces 

the most efficient results. By combining their powers, tactiques and measures, 

as such, Democrats and Republicans may produce an effective response to the 

crisis.  

In conclusion, not only does this study at contributing to the existing literature 

on  the  topic  and  generating  further  discussion  in  the  academic  world,  but  it 

also hopes to highlight the fact that Democrats and Republicans are closer to a 

unanimous  stance  on  the  Ukraine  crisis  than  it  appears.  While  employing 

polar  opposite  rhetoric,  neither  Democrats  nor  Republicans wish to continue 

with the crisis as it is. 

4.3. Shortcomings & Limitations  

To  expand  on 

the  shortcomings  and 

limitations  mentioned 

in 

the 

methodological part, this section will outline key drawbacks of the study that 

have  emerged  while  conducting  the  research,  as  well  as  those  that  have 

become  apparent  after  its  completion.  Among  such  limitations  are  the 

inability  to  directly  establish  a  causal  relationship  between  the  researched 

variables and a lack of data on some of the aspects of the research.  

Firstly,  as  was  mentioned  in  the  methodological  part,  a  causal  relationship 

between the U.S. party polarisation and the changes in the U.S. foreign policy 

towards  Russia  may  not  be  directly  established  due  to  a  plethora  of  other 

factors that may be at play here. While it was concluded that the polarisation 

between  parties  does  influence  the  U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia,  this 

 
 
 
 
53 

limitation still proves to be true for the way rhetoric may or may not influence 

the  U.S.  foreign  policy  in  general.  Considering  the  fact  that  the  Democratic 

narrative and the Republican narrative are strikingly different from each other, 

holding  polar  opposite  views on both the Ukraine crisis and Russia, it would 

still  be  problematic  to  trace  the  effect  of  such  rhetoric  on  the  U.S.  foreign 

policy initiatives in detail.  

Secondly, it was presupposed that a potential problem of the study would be a 

lack  of  data  due  to  the  chronological  framework  that  spans  recent  years 

(2022-2024).  While  the  2024  presidential  elections  in  the  U.S.  provided 

abundant  resources  for  conducting  research  on  the  U.S. party polarisation, it 

was,  indeed,  challenging  to  find  information  on  the  U.S.  foreign  policy 

decisions and tactics in relation to Russia in the public domain. On top of that, 

it is yet to be seen how the difference between Republicans and Democrats in 

power  influences  the  approach  to  both  Russia  and  Ukraine  in  the  coming 

years, with the current research providing a theoretical background.  

Finally,  another  limitation  of  this  study  lies  in  presenting  the  views  of  the 

Democratic  Party  and  the  Republican  Party  on  the  basis  of only four people 

who delivered speeches, representing their respective parties. While it may be 

argued that the presidential elections present the most vivid agglomeration of 

views  of  each  party  in  the  U.S.,  it can still be said that such a generalisation 

may limit the scope and depth of the study.  

To conclude, the research paper does face some limitations which involve the 

inability to directly establish a causal relationship between the key researched 

variables (namely, between the U.S. party polarisation and the changes in the 

U.S.  foreign  policy  towards  Russia),  a  general  lack  of  data  on  the  concrete 

foreign  policy  initiatives  of  the  U.S.  in  relation  to  Russia  due  to  the 

researched  crisis  being  a  recent  and  ongoing  one  as  well  as  a  certain 

 
 
 
 
generalisation  of  Democratic  and  Republican  views on the basis of speeches 

only four people who represent these parties. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion  

55 

To sum it all up, the U.S. and Russia share a rich, eventful history, going from 

being  allies  during  WWII  to  being  primary  opponents  during  the  Cold  War 

that spanned nearly half of the 20th century. The subsequent dissolution of the 

USSR  in  1991  ushered  in  a  seemingly  new  era  of  the  U.S.-Russia relations, 

with  the  latter  being  eager  to  integrate into the Western-led order. Yet, while 

initial  hopes  were  high,  the  following  period  of  the  U.S.-Russia  relations 

would become filled with tensions and numerous points of contention, such as 

the role of NATO, the dominance over the post-Soviet space and, of particular 

importance  to  this  paper,  Ukraine.  The  2022  Ukraine  crisis  would become a 

true watershed moment in the U.S.-Russia relations, marking their economic, 

political and cultural decoupling, and laying the foundation for a novel world 

order.  Notably,  the  crisis  has  divided  not only Russia and the U.S. on a state 

level,  but  also  Democrats  and  Republicans  within  the  U.S.  on  a  domestic 

level.  This  paper  is  dedicated  to  such  polarisation  between  the  Democratic 

Party  and  the  Republican  Party,  and  its  influence  on  the  U.S.  foreign policy 

towards Russia within the context of the 2022 Ukraine crisis.  

Starting from the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, the U.S. and Russia shared 

mutually  amicable  relations  for  a  period  of time. Yet, by the turn of the 21st 

century  the  relations  gradually  started  to  sour  as  both  sides  were  diverging 

rapidly  in  their  stances  on  numerous  issues.  One  of  the  key  points  of 

contention  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia  that  would  resurface  time  and  time 

again  was  NATO  and  its  role  in  the  new  geopolitical  reality  in  which  the 

communist threat from the Soviet Union was absent, yet in which Russia was 

not  fully  accepted  by the West. While the NATO-Russia Council, founded in 

2002,  implied  an  unprecedented  degree  of  cooperation  between  Russia, 

NATO  and  the  U.S.,  this  period  of  cooperation would not last for long, with 

NATO  and  the  post-Soviet  space  reemerging  as  points  of  contention. 

Particularly,  the  Bucharest  Summit  of  April  2008  and  the  proclamation  of 

 
 
56 

Georgia  and  Ukraine becoming members of NATO at some point aggravated 

Russia.  While  the  U.S.  and  Russia  attempted  to  ameliorate  their  bilateral 

relations  with  the  policy  of  ‘reset’  in  2009-2012  under  the  Obama 

administration in the U.S. and Dmitry Medvedev of Russia, this policy would 

ultimately fail in the following years. Yet, with the return of Vladimir Putin in 

2012 as the head of Russia, tensions over NATO reemerged in the U.S.-Russia 

relations, with the Russian occupation of Crimea in 2014 becoming a turning 

point in their relations. Still, the 2022 Ukraine crisis would be an even greater 

turning point in the bilateral relations of the U.S. and Russia, setting them on 

a  course  to  an  economic,  political  and  cultural  decoupling  that had arguably 

not  been  seen  since  the  end  of the Cold War. The relations between the U.S. 

and  Russia,  as  such,  have  undergone  numerous  transformations  in  their 

respective  foreign  policies  towards  one  another  since  the  dissolution  of  the 

USSR  in  1991,  ultimately  resulting  in  a  clash  of  interests  over  the  2022 

Ukraine crisis. 

Considering  the  fact  that  the  ideological  gap  between  the  Democratic  Party 

and  the  Republican  Party  has  been  increasing  rapidly  in  the  past  years,  the 

recent  surge  in  the  U.S.  polarisation  between  the  Democratic  party  and  the 

Republican  Party  has  implications  for  the  U.S.-Russia  relations,  yet,  even 

more  so,  for  the  2022  Ukraine  crisis.  As  the  relations  between  the  U.S.  and 

Russia  deteriorated  after  the  start  of  the  2022  Ukraine crisis, Democrats and 

Republicans  took  opposing  stances  on  the  crisis,  further  complicating  the 

already  strenuous  relations  between  the U.S. and Russia. The paper, as such, 

aimed  not only at researching polarisation between the Democratic party and 

the  Republican  party  in  the  U.S.  per  se,  but  also  at  tracing  the  influence  of 

their polarisation on the U.S. foreign policy towards Russia within the context 

of  the  2022  Ukraine  crisis.  To  do  this,  the  theoretical  framework  of 

neoclassical  realism  by  Rose  (1998)  was  applied,  where  the  U.S.  party 

polarisation  acted  as  an  intervening  variable  in  the  U.S.  foreign  policy 

 
 
57 

formation  in  relation  to  Russia.  On  top  of  that,  the  method  of  narrative 

analysis  was  implemented  in  order  to  reconstruct  the  Democratic  narrative 

and the Republican narrative with the subsequent juxtaposition of them to one 

another.  Ultimately,  it  was  found  that  the  Democratic  and  Republican 

narratives  do  diverge  in  relation  to  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  Russia,  as 

exemplified  by  the coding of a number of speeches and debates, and so does 

the  approach  that  Democrats  and Republicans take vis-à-vis both Russia and 

Ukraine. In particular, the Democratic narrative presupposes a commitment to 

supporting  Ukraine  and  working  alongside  NATO  to  help  Ukraine  in  the 

crisis.  Such an approach, as is evident from the research, is mostly driven by 

the  need  to  defend  the  U.S.  as  a  global  leader  of  the  democratic  and  liberal 

world  and  to  not  let  Ukraine  fall.  By  contrast,  the  Republican  narrative 

emphasises the need to stop providing support to Ukraine, urging both Europe 

and NATO to invest in the crisis. Simultaneously, however, Republicans stress 

the  cruciality  of  resolving  the crisis as soon as possible, pointing to the need 

to negotiate with Russia to resolve the crisis, with both of these notions being 

absent from the Democratic narrative. This Republican approach is driven by 

their  eagerness  to  reorient  the  resources from the Ukraine crisis to the issues 

that  they  view  to  be  more  vital  to  the  U.S.  national  interest  such  as  illegal 

immigration  and  a  trade  war  with  China.  It  is  evident,  as  such,  that 

Republicans  and  Democrats  hold  polar  opposite  views  on  the  Ukraine  crisis 

and  how  it  should  be  approached.  Moreover,  they  differ  on  their  view  of 

Russia  and  the  way  it  should  be  approached  within  the  context of the crisis. 

While  Democrats  omit  mentioning negotiations with Russia or any measures 

that they wish to take in relation to it, Republicans highlight the importance of 

holding  negotiations  to  resolve  the  crisis.  As  such, one inference that can be 

made  from  this is that the U.S. party polarisation plays a key role in the way 

the  U.S.  approaches  Russia in its foreign policy. While sanctions may not be 

lifted  under  either  Democrats  or  Republicans,  it  is  evident  that  under  the 

Republican  leadership  the  U.S.  and  Russia  will  start  a  dialogue  about 

 
58 

resolving  the  crisis,  while  under  the  Democratic  leadership Russia will most 

likely  not  be  included in the negotiations. Whichever scenario plays out, this 

paper  aims  at  highlighting  the  fact  that  neither  Democrats  nor  Republicans 

wish  to  continue  with  the  crisis  as  it  is.  If  both  sides  are  willigning  to 

acknowledge  this,  they  will be able to see past their differences. In doing so, 

they  may pool their resources to produce a joint effort in resolving the crisis, 

which will bring everyone closer to peace.  

On  a  final  note,  it  can  be  stated  that  the  bilateral  relations  between the U.S. 

and  Russia  have  undergone  numerous  changes  over  the  past  couple  of 

decades,  alternating  between  confrontation  and  cooperation  time  and  time 

again. While both states were willing to ameliorate their relations on multiple 

occasions,  from  the  foundation  of  the  NATO-Russia  Council  in  2002  to  the 

policy  of  ‘reset’  between  2009  and  2012,  these  attempts  ultimately  failed  to 

produce durable and sustainable cooperative relations. Instead, such points of 

contention  as  the  role  of  NATO,  the  post-Soviet  space,  and  Ukraine  in 

particular, have permeated their relations, leading to a rapid deterioration after 

the start of the 2022 Ukraine crisis. Not only did the crisis divide the U.S. and 

Russia, however, as the U.S. domestic political landscape also became divided 

with  regard  to  this  topic.  Particularly,  the  Democratic  Party  and  the 

Republican  Party  took  opposing  stances  on  Ukraine  and  Russia,  further 

aggravating  the  bilateral  relations  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia.  While  the 

U.S.-Russia  relations  suffered  seemingly  irreparable  damage  under  the 

Democratic  leadership  within  the context of the 2022 Ukraine crisis, it is yet 

to  be  seen  how  the  story will unfold under the Republican leadership. While 

the  Republican  narrative  points  to  a  softer  approach  towards  Russia,  being 

willing  to  negotiate  the  details  of  the  Ukraine  crisis  and  its  resolution,  only 

time  will  show  if  this  manifests.  Nonetheless,  whether  the  U.S.  and  Russia 

manage  to  repair  their  bilateral  relations  or  not,  and  whether  this  will 

contribute  to  the  resolution  of  the  Ukraine  crisis  or  not,  one  thing  that  is 

 
 
59 

mostly  certain  is  that  the  world  is  arguably  as  divided  as  it  has  never  been 

before  and  that  polarisation,  be  it  between  different  parties  or  between 

different  states,  is  proliferating,  and,  as  such,  is  worth  the  attention  of  the 

academia.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
References  

60 

Abramowitz,  A.  I.  (2010).  The  disappearing  center:  Engaged  citizens, 

polarization, and American democracy. Yale University Press. 

Achcar,  G.  (2023).  The  New  Cold  War:  The  United  States,  Russia  and 

China-From Kosovo to Ukraine. Saqi Books. 

Avdaliani,  E.  (2017).  US-Russia  Relations  Plunge  Still Further. Begin-Sadat 

Center for Strategic Studies.  

Blackman, J. (2016). Gridlock. Harvard Law Review, 130(1), 241–305. 

Bugayova, N. (2019). 1991 — 1999: The Yeltsin Period. In How We Got Here 

With  Russia:  The  Kremlin’s  Worldview  (pp.  12–13).  Institute  for  the 

Study of War.  

Caro,  C.-A.  (2016).  Trump  is  Simply  the  End  Product:  The  Polarisation  of 

U.S.  Politics  Is  the Culmination of Long-Term Trends. In G. Wahlers 

(Ed.),  Climate.  Energy.  Security.  (pp.  88–106).  Konrad  Adenauer 

Stiftung.  

Charap,  S.  (2013).  Beyond  the  Russian  Reset.  The  National  Interest,  126, 

39–48. 

Downs,  A.  (1957).  An  economic  theory  of  democracy.  New  York:  Harper, 

115. 

Durney,  J.  (2017).  Defining  the  Paris  Agreement:  A  Study  of  Executive 

Power  and  Political  Commitments.  Carbon  &  Climate  Law  Review, 

11(3), 234–242.  

 
Franekova,  A.  (2002).  Uneasy  Expansion:  NATO  and  Russia.  Harvard 

61 

International Review, 24(3), 10–11.  

Fukuyama, F. (1992). The end of history and the last man. The Free Press. 

Fukuyama,  F.  (2022)  Francis  Fukuyama:  Putin's  war  on  the  liberal  order. 

Financial Times. 

German,  T.  (2024).  From  cooperation  to  confrontation:  US-Russia  relations 

since 9/11. International Politics, 61(3), 567-586. 

Gladkyy, O. (2003). American Foreign Policy and U.S. Relations with Russia 

and China after 11 September. World Affairs, 166(1), 3–23.  

Hare, C., & Poole, K. T. (2014). The Polarization of Contemporary American 

Politics. Polity, 46(3), 411–429.  

Henrikson,  A.  K.  (1980).  The  Creation  of  the  North  Atlantic  Alliance, 

1948-1952. Naval War College Review, 33(3), 4–39.  

Herd, G. P. (2005). Russia and the “Orange Revolution”: Response, Rhetoric, 

Reality? Connections, 4(2), 15–28.  

Hetherington,  M.  J.  (2009).  Putting  polarization  in  perspective.  British 

Journal of Political Science, 39(2), 413-448. 

Hoffman, F. G. (2007). Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars. 

Potomac Institute for Policy Studies. 

Ikenberry,  G.  J.  (2022).  Why  American  Power  Endures:  The  US-Led  Order 

Isn't in Decline. Foreign Aff., 101, 69. 

 
62 

Iyengar,  S.,  Sood,  G.,  &  Lelkes,  Y.  (2012).  Affect,  Not  Ideology:  A  Social 

Identity  Perspective  on  Polarization.  The  Public  Opinion  Quarterly, 

76(3), 405–431.  

Jones,  D.  R.  (2001).  Party  Polarization  and  Legislative  Gridlock.  Political 

Research Quarterly, 54(1), 125–141.  

Kalėda, A. (2023). The impact of political polarization on US foreign policy: 

analyzing the growing divide between Republicans and Democrats on 

the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. (Doctoral dissertation). 

Karatnycky,  A.  (2005). Ukraine’s Orange Revolution. Foreign Affairs, 84(2), 

35–52.  

Katz,  M.  N.  (2014).  Can  Russian-US  Relations  Improve?  Strategic  Studies 

Quarterly, 8(2), 129–141. 

Kramer,  D.  J.  (2022).  Defeating  Putin  in  Ukraine  is  vital  to  the  future  of 

democracy. Journal of Democracy. 

Lazarević, D. (2009). NATO Enlargement to Ukraine and Georgia: Old Wine 

in New Bottles? Connections, 9(1), 29–66.  

Lee,  F.  E.  (2015).  How  party polarization affects governance. Annual review 

of political science, 18(1), 261-282. 

Lynch, A. C. (2016). The influence of regime type on Russian foreign policy 

toward  “the  West,”  1992–2015.  Communist  and  Post-Communist 

Studies, 49(1), 101-111. 

Lynch, A. C. (2018). Russia’s foreign policy. Great Decisions, 23–34.  

 
Matsaberidze,  D.  (2015).  Russia  vs.  EU/US  through  Georgia  and  Ukraine. 

63 

Connections, 14(2), 77–86.  

McCarty,  N.  (2019).  Polarization:  What  everyone  needs  to  know.  Oxford 

University Press. 

McFaul,  M.,  Sestanovich,  S.,  &  Mearsheimer,  J.  J.  (2014).  Faulty  powers: 

Who started the Ukraine crisis?. Foreign Affairs, 93(6), 167-178. 

Mearsheimer,  J.  (2022).  John  Mearsheimer  on  why  the  West  is  principally 

responsible for the Ukrainian crisis. The Economist. 

Mearsheimer,  J.  (2023).  The  Darkness  Ahead:  Where  The  Ukraine  War  Is 

Headed. Substack. 

Mearsheimer,  J.  J.  (2014).  Why  the  Ukraine  crisis  is  the  West's  fault:  the 

liberal delusions that provoked Putin. Foreign Aff., 93, 77. 

Mello,  P.  A., & Ostermann, F. (Eds.). (2023). Routledge handbook of foreign 

policy analysis methods. Routledge. 

Nagar,  C.  B.,  Helberg,  P.,  &  Potkin,  F.  (2014).  Introduction to Objectives of 

the  United  States  Foreign  Policy.  Politikon:  The  IAPSS  Journal  of 

Political Science, 22, 5-15. 

Newlin, C., Conley, H. A., Viakhireva, N., & Timofeev, I. (2020). U.S.-Russia 

Relations  at  a  Crossroads.  Center  for  Strategic  and  International 

Studies (CSIS).  

Pew  Research  Center.  (2014).  Political  polarization  in  the  American  public. 

Retrieved 

from 

 
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2014/06/12/political-polarizatio

64 

n-in-the-american-public/ (April 10th, 2025) 

Pew  Research Center. (2022). The polarization in today’s Congress has roots 

that 

go 

back 

decades. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2022/03/10/the-polarization-

in-todays-congress-has-roots-that-go-back-decades/ (April 9th, 2025) 

Pew  Research  Center.  (2024).  Growing  partisan  divisions  over  NATO  and 

Ukraine. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2024/05/08/growing-partisan-divi

sions-over-nato-and-ukraine/ (April 9th, 2025) 

Pew  Research  Center.  (2024).  War  in  Ukraine:  Wide  partisan  differences on 

U.S. 

responsibility 

and 

support. 

Retrived 

from 

https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2024/07/29/war-in-ukraine-wide

-partisan-differences-on-u-s-responsibility-and-support/ 

(April  9th, 

2025) 

Pildes,  R.  H.  (2011).  Why  the  Center  Does  Not  Hold:  The  Causes  of 

Hyperpolarized  Democracy  in  America.  California  Law  Review, 

99(2), 273–333.  

Ratti,  L.  (2013).  ‘Resetting’NATO–Russia  relations:  a  realist  appraisal  two 

decades after the USSR. The Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 26(2), 

141-161. 

 
65 

Ratti,  L.  (2013).  ‘Resetting’  NATO–Russia  Relations:  A  Realist  Appraisal 

Two  Decades  after the USSR. The Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 

26(2), 141–161.  

Ripsman, N. M., Taliaferro, J. W., & Lobell, S. E. (2016). Neoclassical Realist 

Theory  and  the  Limits  of  Structural  Realism.  Neoclassical  Realist 

Theory of International Politics, 16-32. 

Rose,  G.  (1998).  Neoclassical  Realism  and  Theories  of  Foreign  Policy 

[Review  of  The  Perils  of  Anarchy:  Contemporary  Realism  and 

International Security; Useful Adversaries: Grand Strategy, Domestic 

Mobilization,  and  Sino-American  Conflict,  1947-1958;  Deadly 

Imbalances: Tripolarity and Hitler’s Strategy of World Conquest; The 

Elusive  Balance:  Power  and  Perceptions during the Cold War; From 

Wealth  to  Power:  The  Unusual  Origins  of  America’s  World  Role,  by 

M.  E.  Brown, T. J. Christensen, R. L. Schweller, W. C. Wohlforth, & 

F. Zakaria]. World Politics, 51(1), 144–172.  

Rostow,  E.V. (1992). United States Foreign Policy After the Soviet Collapse. 

SAIS Review 12(2), 1-21. 

Rumer,  E.,  &  Sokolsky,  R. 

(2019).  Post–Cold  War  U.S.-Russian 

Relations—What Went Wrong? In Thirty Years of U.S. Policy Toward 

Russia:  Can  the  Vicious  Circle  Be  Broken?  (pp.  5–18).  Carnegie 

Endowment for International Peace.  

 
66 

Smeltz,  D.,  Goncharov,  S.,  &  Wojtowicz,  L.  (2016).  US  and  Russia: 

Insecurity  and  Mistrust  shape  Mutual  Perceptions.  Chicago  Council 

on Global Affairs. 

Sümer, G. (2020). The Impact of the Cold War Legacy on US-Russia Bilateral 

Relation. Bölgesel Araştırmalar Dergisi, 4(1), 116-142. 

Tama,  J.  (2024).  Bipartisanship  and  US  foreign  policy:  cooperation  in  a 

polarized age. Oxford University Press. 

Tsygankov,  A.  P.  (2007).  Two  faces  of  Putin's  great  power  pragmatism.  The 

Soviet and Post-Soviet Review, 34(1), 103-119. 

Tsygankov,  A.  P.  (Ed.).  (2018).  Routledge  handbook  of  Russian  foreign 

policy. Abingdon: Routledge, 237-253. 

Vail, H. (2014). Polarizing Issues in the American Political Parties: Women In 

Party Platforms. Honors College. 

Van  Der  Veen,  O.  (2021).  Political  Polarisation  Compared:  Creating  a 

Comprehensive Index of Political Polarisation.  

Walt,  S.  M.  (2022).  Liberal  Illusions  Caused  the  Ukraine  Crisis.  Foreign 

Policy. 

Young,  K.  G.  (2014).  American  exceptionalism  and  government  shutdowns: 

A  comparative  constitutional  reflection  on  the  2013  lapse  in 

appropriations. BUL Rev., 94, 992. 

Zelikow, P. (1994). Beyond Boris Yeltsin. Foreign Affairs, 73(1), 44–55.  

 
 
 
67 

 
 
 
 
 
