National Research University Higher School of Economics 

Faculty School of Foreign Languages 

___________________________________________________________ 

Rim M. Avdi and Arina I. Pudrenko 

The Linguo-cultural Analysis of Pre-election and Victory Speeches 

(On the Basis of the US Presidential Speeches) 

BACHELOR’S THESIS, written 

in the field 45.03.02 “Linguistics” 

degree programme “Foreign Languages and Intercultural Communication” 

Research advisor: 

Doctor of 

Pedagogical Sciences, Professor 

E. S. Lutkova 

Moscow, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Table of Contents  

Introduction.........................................................................................................2 
Theoretical Part.................................................................................................. 6 
1.1. Linguo-culturology and Cultural Linguistics.................................................6 
1.2. Political Discourse....................................................................................... 16 
1.3. Linguistic and Cultural analysis...................................................................24 
1.4. The use of culturally-loaded linguistic devices in political discourse......... 41 
Practical Part.....................................................................................................64 
2.1 Research Design.......................................................................................... 64 
2.2 Sampling...................................................................................................... 71 
2.3 Content Analysis......................................................................................... 74 
Pre-election speech by Georger W. Bush (2004)...........................................74 
Victory speech by George W. Bush (2004)....................................................91 
Pre-election speech by Barack Hussein Obama (2012).................................94 
Victory speech by Barack Hussein Obama (2012)...................................... 103 
Pre-election speech by Donald John Trump (2024).................................... 107 
Victory speech by Donald John Trump (2024)............................................ 118 
2.4 Comparative Analysis...............................................................................121 
2.5 Results........................................................................................................ 128 
Discussion.........................................................................................................134 
Conclusion....................................................................................................... 137 
References........................................................................................................ 138 
Appendix..........................................................................................................152 

Introduction 

In  the  modern  globalised  world,  political  discourse  has  become  a 

powerful  tool  for  shaping  public  opinion  and  influencing  societal  values.  The 

language  used  by  political  leaders not only reflects but also actively constructs 

cultural  and  ideological realities (Bystrov, 2024). It is thus becoming more and 

more  relevant  and  crucial  to  study  the  multifaceted  connection  between 

language and culture to identify its influence on the persuasive and manipulative 

 
 
 
3 

power  of  such  a  socially  meaningful  domain  of  public  life. This study aims to 

analyse political discourse through the lens of linguistic and cultural approach.  

In contemporary society and the developing digital environment, political 

discourse  plays  a  critical  role  in  influencing  public  opinion,  attitudes,  and 

beliefs  by  affecting  how  audiences  perceive  political  realities.  Among  the 

various  forms  of  political  communication,  presidential  speeches  hold  a 

particularly significant position due to their profound impact on social, political, 

economic,  and  cultural  spheres  of  everyday 

life 

(Awawdeh,  2021). 

Consequently,  these  speeches  constitute  the  primary  focus  of  the  present 

research. 

As  highlighted  by  Almahasees  &  Mahmoud  (2022),  political  leaders 

strategically employ a wide range of culturally-loaded stylistic devices aimed at 

impacting  listeners’  perceptions  in  accordance  with  the  objectives  of  political 

campaigns.  These  linguistic  tools  are  deliberately  implemented  to  frame 

ideologies  that  resonate  with  prevailing  societal  values  and  cultural  norms. 

Within  the  scope  of  this  study,  culturally-loaded  linguistic  features  are 

considered  as  language  units  that  evoke  specific  cultural  contexts  and  shared 

meanings (Bystrov, 2024). 

The research concentrates on two distinct kinds of presidential speeches – 

pre-election and victory speeches, delivered by three prominent U.S. presidents 

of  the  21st  century  during  their  second  terms:  Donald  John  Trump,  Barack 

Hussein  Obama,  and  George  Walker  Bush.  Each  of  these  leaders  governed 

within  unique  cultural,  political,  and  economic  environments,  which  have 

significantly  influenced  their  rhetorical  styles  and  communicative  strategies 

(Liu  &  Zhang,  2018).  This  diversity  offers  a  rich  comparative  framework  for 

examining  how  language  reflects  and  responds  to  changing  socio-political 

contexts. 

Language,  as  a  powerful  communication  tool,  enables  speakers  to 

structure  utterances  that  profoundly  influence  audience  perspectives  (Humă, 

 
4 

2023).  However,  an  overview  of  the  existing  research  field  focusing  on  the 

linguistic and cultural analysis of political speeches reveals a notable gap: while 

numerous  studies  address  linguistic  and  cultural  features in political discourse, 

there  remains  a  lack  of  comprehensive  investigation  into  certain  frequently 

employed  stylistic  devices  within  presidential  speeches.  For  example,  Tian 

(2021)  points  out  that  linguistic  units  such  as  irony,  phraseological  units,  and 

specific rhetorical strategies have not been thoroughly examined in this context 

yet.  In  addition,  the  analysis  of  the  studies  on  the  topic  has  demonstrated  that 

there  is  no  extensive  empirical  data  that  would reflect a holistic representation 

of  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  linguistic  choices  made  by  a  political  figure 

expressed within different language layers that would shed light on how cultural 

background of the speaker influences or explains these choices.  

Therefore,  the  major  aim  of  this  research  is  to  address  this  gap  by 

systematically  examining  the  use  of  culturally-loaded linguistic units that have 

been  understudied  in  previous  studies.  Further  on,  the  study’s  another  crucial 

goal  is  to  reveal  and  analyse  all  linguistic  features  that  carry  cultural 

connotations  or 

significantly 

intensify 

the 

emotional  density 

and 

manipulativeness within the selected speeches.  

This  comprehensive  approach  is  grounded  in  the  linguistic  and  cultural 

analytical  paradigm,  which  emphasises  the  need  to  pay  attention  to  “all 

socio-ideological  and  cultural  processes reflected in the language” (Shaklein et 

al.,  2019,  p.  1464).  The  application  of  this  framework  in  the  given  study  is 

needed  to  conduct  a  full-encompassing  examination  of  the  linguistic  features 

employed  by  the  presidents,  taking  into  consideration  that  each  of  them  is  a 

representative of a certain culture and unique social experiences.  

Accordingly, the study seeks to answer the following research questions: 

-  What  culturally-loaded  linguistic  features  are  employed  in  political 

discourse, and what primary functions do they serve? 

 
5 

-  How  do  these  features  vary  between  different  types  of  presidential 

speeches, specifically pre-election and victory speeches?   

-  How  do  these  features  differ  between  three  presidents  with  diverse 

backgrounds?  

- 

In  what ways do these speeches reflect cultural values, societal attitudes, 

and  the  political  and  economic realities of the country through linguistic 

means? 

These  questions  are  explored  through  a  comprehensive  literature review 

that  lays  the  foundation  for the subsequent practical analysis of the transcribed 

presidential speeches. 

As  for  the  hypothesis  of  this  study,  it  is  initially  assumed  that  political 

discourse  is  characterised  by  distinct  culturally-specific  linguistic  units  and 

rhetorical  strategies  that  encapsulate  underlying  societal  values  and  political 

ideologies.  Moreover,  the  hypothesis  suggests  that  cultural  backgrounds of the 

speakers  and  the  differences  in  communicative  contexts  of  two  types  of 

speeches  significantly  influence  the  occurrence  of  particular  devices  and 

persuasive strategies. 

In  order  to  achieve  the  stated  research  aims,  the study first establishes a 

comprehensive  theoretical  overview  of  literature  that  comprises  a  thorough 

description  of  the  nature  and  different  frameworks  to  the  application  of 

linguistic  and  cultural  analytical  approach,  the  essence  of  political  discourse, 

and  the  use  of  specific  culturally-loaded  linguistic  units  within  its  paradigm. 

Then,  the  research  applies  a  mixed-methods  research  design,  utilising  critical 

discourse  analysis,  content  analysis,  and  comparative  analysis  methods  to 

examine the transcribed speeches through the linguistic and cultural perspective. 

This  methodology  enables  the  identification  of  the  frequency  of  occurrence, 

functions, and effects of the rhetorical strategies and culturally-loaded linguistic 

units  on  the  perception  of  the  utterances.  Based  on  the  quantitative  content 

analysis  method,  the  revealed  features  are  displayed  in  the forms of visualised 

 
6 

graphs  and  tables,  featuring  all  the  examples  of  the  peculiar  use  of  language 

detected  in  the  presidents’  speeches.   By  comparing  the  speeches  of  the  three 

presidents  based  on  the  outlined  statistics,  the  research  reveals  how  the 

individual  backgrounds  of  the  speakers,  alongside  the  political,  historical  and 

cultural contexts, shape their linguistic choices. 

The  findings  of  this  research  significantly  contribute  to  the  existing 

research  field  on  the  linguistic  and  cultural  features  represented  in  political 

discourse.  They  provide 

insights 

into  how 

language  operates  as  a 

culturally-resonant tool for influencing public opinion and constructing political 

realities, thereby enriching the overall understanding of the intersection between 

language, culture, and politics.  

Theoretical Part 

1.1. Linguo-culturology and Cultural Linguistics 

To  begin  with,  it  is  important  to  state  that  language  is  a  complex 

phenomenon  that  emerged  in  human  society.  It  represents  the  interaction  of 

opposite  concepts  as  a  system  and  an  anti-system,  a  final  product  and  the 

activity  itself,  comprising  both  random  and  structured  elements  that  define  it 

(Maslova,  2001).  Due  to  this  variable  nature,  the  language  is  not stagnant and 

can change. 

One clear example of language’s interactive capability is its influence on 

the  creation  and  evolution  of  culture,  which  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the 

development  of  personal  identity  (Vorobyev,  2006).  (Vorobyev,  2006).  The 

concept  and  definition  of  linguistic  personality  provided  by  Karaulov  (1987) 

indicate  that  a  person's  abilities  and  characteristics  are  determined  by  the 

linguistic  cognition  of  one’s  nationality.  Further,  it  is  these  characteristics 

expressed  in  culture  that  are  the  basis  for  the  beginning  of  spiritual 

 
7 

communication between people, as well as the possibility of understanding and 

cooperation between them. 

With  the  development  of  international  relations  and  the  mixing  of 

nationalities,  the  problem  of  the  interconnection  between  language and culture 

led  to  the  creation  and  further  development  of  separate  approaches  to  its 

research  and  study.  One  of  them  was  linguo-culturology.  This  scientific 

discipline  is  based  on  a  holistic  and  systematic  consideration  of  language  and 

culture as a set of units (linguo-cultureme) that form field structures (Vorobyov, 

2006).  According  to  this  approach,  the  analysed  objects  are  considered  as 

systems of acquired and transmitted cultural values, which are directly reflected 

in the language. 

Supporting 

the 

idea  of  the  influence  of  language  on  humans, 

linguo-culturology  is  also  based  on  the  hypothesis  of  linguistic  relativity  that 

was  initiated  by  Edward  Sapir  and  his  follower  Benjamin  Lee  Whorf  in  the 

1930s.  According  to  this  theory,  the  structure  of  language  and  the  systemic 

semantics  of  its  units  have  a  formative  effect  on  the  structure  of  thinking  and 

ways  of  cognition  of  the  external  world  by  a  particular  nationality.  Thus, 

representatives  of  ethnic  groups  who  speak  different  languages  have  clear 

differences in how they perceive the same categories of the world around them. 

For example, the concepts of property, time and position in society. In addition, 

it  is  also  crucial  to  note  that  representatives  of  different  linguistic  groups 

evaluate  and  react  in  radically  different  ways  to  both  everyday  events  and 

phenomena,  as  well  as  to  more  rare or extraordinary ones, such as presidential 

elections. 

The  Sepir-Whorf  hypothesis  also  presents  the  idea  that  people  who 

combine  several  language  structures  (regardless  of  the  reasons,  for  example, 

natural and artificial bilinguals) are able to simultaneously use different systems 

of  thinking  and  ways of world cognition. For this reason, these individuals can 

 
8 

use  approaches  that  are  unusual  for  one  ethnicity,  but  natural  for  another,  in 

order to establish spiritual communication between people. 

Overall, in the research, language is considered to be a utility that can be 

implemented in the interpretation of reality, and therefore is deemed as a way to 

get closer to the essence of the modern mentality of separate nations, as well as 

preserved  representations  of  historical  events  and  phenomena  in  the  format  of 

proverbs, phraseological units, and other units. 

However,  it  is  crucial  to  disclose  the  fact  that  the  idea  of  studying  the 

interconnection  between language and culture is not unified and is divided into 

two  main  approaches:  linguo-culturology  (post-Soviet  approach)  and  cultural 

linguistics  (Western  approach).  Peeters  (2019)  believes  that  this  kind  of 

separation  of  terms is an example of a common phenomenon of terminological 

variation.  Moreover,  according  to  the  author,  these  two  scientific  disciplines 

have  the  same  basis  and  objectives,  and  using  different  names  to  address  one 

approach can lead to misunderstandings among scientists and is a manifestation 

of terminological indifference. 

At 

the  same 

time,  Mizin  and  Korostenski  (2019)  argue 

that 

linguo-culturology  and  cultural  linguistics  are  not  two  names  of  the  same 

scientific discipline, but two similar yet not identical approaches to the study of 

the  relationship  between  language  and  culture.  The  authors  claim  that  both 

methods  appeared  at  approximately  the  same  time,  and  that  the  Western 

approach,  similar  to  the  post-Soviet  one,  was  based  on  the theory of linguistic 

relativity  by  Sapir-Whorf.  Nevertheless,  the  further  development  of  scientific 

disciplines  does  not  coincide.  Maslova  (2001)  reveals  that  it  is  not possible to 

periodise the emergence and full emergence of relatively new sciences, such as 

linguo-culturology  and  cultural  linguistics,  due  to  the  subjectivity  of  the 

assessment and the lack of clearly defined criteria for conducting this work. 

With  the  continuation  of  the  process  of  parallel  development  of 

linguo-culturology  and  cultural  linguistics,  as  well  as  due  to  the  lack  of 

 
9 

unification  of  research  and  work  among  these  fields,  there  has  been  a  radical 

differentiation  between  post-Soviet  and  Western  approaches.  This  is  reflected 

not  only  in  variations  in  the  proposed  specifications  and  classifications  of  the 

analysed units, namely language and culture, but also in the goals and objectives 

of research in these disciplines (Mizin and Korostenski, 2019). 

-  Linguo-culturology,  as  a  scientific  discipline,  studies  not  just  the 

relationship  between  language  and  culture,  but  language  as  a 

cultural  phenomenon  (Maslova,  2001).  This  definition  of the very 

essence  of  the  approach  implies  considering language as a way of 

expressing a certain national mentality. 

-  Cultural  linguistics,  as  an  interdisciplinary  field  of  research, 

explores 

the 

relationship  between 

language,  culture,  and 

conceptualisation  (Sharifian,  2017).  This  approach  has  integrated 

both  cognitive  studies  and  cognitive  anthropology,  as  it  considers 

cultural models that are directly related to language. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  most  extensive  theoretical  base,  both  scientific 

disciplines,  namely  linguo-culturology  and  cultural  linguistics,  are  to  be 

considered in the paper, as well as the basic concepts and classifications of both 

are to be identified. 

To  derive  a  comprehensive  definition  of  the  term linguo-culturology, it 

is  first  necessary  to  point  out  what  culture  is  and  what  its  main  functions  are 

(Vorobyev, 2006). Naik et al. (2023) state that culture includes many aspects of 

people's  lives,  such  as  traditions,  values,  worldviews,  and  behaviors.  At  the 

same  time,  culture  undoubtedly  encompasses  various  fields  of  human  activity, 

namely  religion,  education  and  language.  Supporting  the  latter,  Sepir  (1993) 

considers  “culture”  as  what  a  society  does  and  thinks,  and  language  as  how it 

does  things  and thinks. Considering the main functions of culture, Makarychev 

&  Yatsyk  (2017)  also  add  that  culture is primarily a semiotic system, the main 

task of which is the accumulation and further preservation of information. 

 
10 

Based  on the derived ideas about the functions of language and culture, 

Vorobyev  (2006)  argues  that  linguo-culturology  is  a  synthesising  type  of 

science,  which  in  fact  is  located  at  the  intersection  of  cultural  studies  and 

philology or linguistics. Maslova (2001) highlights that this branch of linguistics 

is a way of considering language as a system of interpretation and realisation of 

cultural  values  of  ethnic  groups.  Malkhazova  (2015)  presents  a  more  modern 

view  of  linguo-culturology,  stating  that  this  science  focuses  on  the  analysis  of 

thought  processes,  as  well  as  cultural  and  psychological  characteristics  that 

represent  different  nations.  This  is  done  to  determine  their  cultural  values  and 

the  peculiarities  of  the  separation  of  the  material  and  non-material  world.  The 

latter  is  based  on  the  works  of  Humboldt,  according  to  which  material  and 

immaterial (spiritual) culture take a certain place in language. 

The main objective of linguo-culturology is the systematic study of both 

the  relationship  and  the  interaction  of  culture  and  language  in  the  process  of 

their  functioning  and  implementation  (Vorobyev,  2006).  The  author  also 

highlights the importance of interpreting this kind of interaction exclusively as a 

single  unified  system.  At  the  same  time,  Maslova  (2001)  emphasizes  as  the 

main  task  of  linguo-culturology  not  the  interpretation  of  interaction,  but  the 

study  of  the  ways  in  which  language  remembers,  stores,  and  later  translates  a 

particular  culture.  The  fundamental  goal  of  linguo-culturology  is  also 

considered  to  be  the  study  of  changes in language and its units that are caused 

by changes in culture, as well as in its functioning system (Urayimova, 2022). 

As  for  the  basics  of  linguo-culturology,  Vorobyev  (2006)  substantiates 

the  essence  of  the  central  triad  of  this  science,  on  the  basis of which the main 

problems of the discipline are considered, and further solved. It consists of: 

- 

language - defines thinking and unites individuals in a community; 

-  nation  (national  personality)  -  formed  under  the  influence  of 

territorial community and language, as well as internal creation; 

-  culture - dynamic, so that it develops within a nation or people; 

 
11 

It is possible to see that each aspect is connected with the following one, 

and  cannot  exist  in  isolation.  A  change  in  one  component  under  external  or 

internal influence will undoubtedly affect the others. 

The  theory  of the triad of linguo-culturology has its origin in the works 

of Humboldt (1956), where a similar three-step relationship is presented: 

-  personality (a person with a mindset); 

- 

language; 

-  culture; 

It is important to note that in Humboldt's triad (1956), language is not in 

the first place for ideological reasons. The scientist identified that this aspect has 

an  “intermediate”  position  between  human  and  the  world, and also serves as a 

boundary  established  by the personality between the cognition of the inner and 

outer  worlds.  For  this  reason,  by  learning  different  languages,  it  is  possible  to 

describe people’s mentality, behaviour, as well as their main characteristics. 

Maslova (2001), based on the object of the study, also identifies 9 main 

units  of  research  in  linguo-culturology.  The  choice  of  these  aspects  is 

determined  by  their  “cultural  significance”  and  how  “culturally-loaded”  they 

are. 

-  Culturally-loaded words and expressions; 

These are culturally determined linguistic units that are unique in their meaning 

and  do  not  have  equivalent  phrases  or  expressions  in other languages, e.g. “to 

feel under the weather”, “to take tea with someone”. 

-  Mythologised linguistic units that are fixed in the language; 

These  are  units  that  are  based  on  mythologems,  these  are  important  situations 

and  characters  for  a  particular  myth.  Myths are usually based on an archetype, 

which  is  a  stable  unit  recognisable  at  the  cultural  level.  For  example, 

phraseological units with a component such as "tea" are based on the archetype 

of  tea  as  a  symbol  of  comfort,  warmth,  and  community, i.e. “to spill the tea”, 

and “not my cup of tea”. 

 
12 

-  Paremiological fund of language; 

These  are  proverbs  and  sayings  that  have  their  origin  in  the  national 

consciousness  and  are  interconnected  with  the history of a particular people or 

ethnic group, as well as their culture. For example, the proverb "Every dog has 

its  day",  which  means  that  every  person  (the  idea  is  conveyed  through  the 

archetype  of  the  dog)  will  one  day  have  a  period  of  luck,  power  and  success. 

The  history  of this proverb dates back to Elizabeth I, when the queen used this 

phrase in a letter to her brother as she was asked to describe herself. 

-  Phraseological fund of language; 

This is a way to reflect the main aspects of the culture, history and mentality of 

a particular nation. Some of the examples are “to lose one’s head” and “servant 

of Melpomene”. 

-  Standards, stereotypes, symbols; 

These  three  aspects  reflect  not  only  the  way  a  nation  perceives  the  world,  but 

also  how  they  decode  the  information  obtained.  Thus,  symbols  are  nationally 

labeled  units.  Further,  standards  are  interconnected  with  criteria  for measuring 

peace  in  accordance  with  criteria  established  by  societies,  for  example,  in  the 

format  of  stable  expressions. The opposite is stereotypes, which, although they 

also evaluate, do so unconsciously. For example, “proud as a peacock” and “as 

wise as an owl”. 

-  Metaphors and images of language; 

These two aspects have the most important linguistic essence. Thus, image is an 

ideological  reproduction  of  information  about  the  subject  with  which  it  is 

correlated.  It  is  also  important  to  reveal  the  essence  of  the  inner  form  of  such 

words,  which  make  their  meanings  motivated.  Further,  the  inner  forms 

correspond  to  the  literal  meanings  conveyed  by  the  metaphors.  The  existing 

associations with images, as well as the connotations that create internal forms, 

make  such  words  culturally loaded. Some examples are “heart made of stone” 

and “a sub-branched beach”. 

 
13 

-  Stylistic structure of language; 

This  aspect  is  related  to  the  consideration  of  the  dialectal  stratification  of  the 

language.  The  relationship  between  the formal (literary) and informal (spoken) 

languages is also explored, as they reflect the cultural history of society. Despite 

the fact that the normative and stylistic structure of society reflects the culture of 

the  people  to  a  lesser  extent  in  comparison  with  lexical  units,  it  is still crucial 

for creating a unified image of society. 

-  Speech behavior (verbal behaviour); 

This term refers to both speech and any other behavior that is inherently fixed in 

nominative,  grammatical,  and  stylistic  units.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 

cultural  identity  of  a  certain  nationality  and  its  verbal  communication  develop 

based  on  particular  factors,  which  shape  not  only  the  variations  in  how 

information is transmitted and its functions, but also the way it is organised. The 

mentioned factors inherently have a various basis and history of creation, but at 

the  same  time  they  are  essentially  interrelated  with  linguistic  psycholinguistic 

aspects. 

-  Speech etiquette. 

This  term  can  be  described  as  the  rules  and  norms  established  by  a  certain 

society  for  the  formation  of  speech  behavior  in accordance with the status and 

communicative  goal  of  the  speaker.  In  other  words,  speech  etiquette  is  a 

culturally normative behavior of a person. 

Overall,  all  of  the  above-mentioned  9  aspects  identified  by  Maslova 

(2001)  explore  the  connection  between  certain  linguistic  expressions  used  by 

both  certain people and society in general with the culture and mentality of the 

nation, as well as with their cultural cognition, accepted speech norms, customs 

and  traditions.  It  is  also  crucial  to  state  that  this  list  contains  only  the  most 

important units to be analysed in regard with linguo-culturological approach. 

Based  on 

the  above  mentioned  definitions, 

in 

this  paper 

linguo-culturology  is  considered  as  a  synthesizing  type  of  science  aimed  at 

 
14 

studying  the  speech,  mental  and  cultural  characteristics  of  different  ethnicities 

(Vorobyev,  2006;  Maslova,  2001;  Urayimova,  2022).  Therefore,  the  main 

objectives are the systematic study of the interaction of language and culture, as 

well as ways to preserve and further translate cultural units, taking into account 

the dynamics of culture. 

Moving  to  cultural  linguistics,  it  is  also  necessary  to  consider different 

approaches  to the definition of this scientific discipline. According to Sharifian 

(2017), it is a sub-discipline of linguistics that has a multidisciplinary origin and 

that  explores  interconnection  between  language,  culture  and conceptualisation. 

The latter is analyzed with special attention, since its meaning is directly related 

to  cognitive  linguistics,  on  which  cultural  linguistics  is  based.  Dobrova  et  al. 

(2018),  while  maintaining  the  importance  of  this  aspect,  points  out  that  all 

knowledge, including language, acquired by a person during their lifetime is the 

result  of  conceptualization  and  categorization  of  the  surrounding  world.  In 

addition,  Rahimova  (2024)  argues  that  when  analyzing  cognitive  processes, 

which  are  the  basis  for  using  language  and  building  thoughts  and  ideas  with 

their  further  transmission,  it  becomes  possible  to  systematize  the  structure  of 

human  thinking.  Considering  the  fact  that  cultural  linguistics  aims  to  improve 

the overall understanding of the cultural conceptualization of human experience, 

this  discipline  is  considered  more  promising  in  comparison  with  cultural 

linguistics (Peeters, 2019). 

To  fully  understand  the  objectives  of  cultural  linguistics,  it  is  first 

necessary to analyze the concept of category. According to Maslova (2019), this 

is  any  group  of  linguistic  elements  that  have  been  separated  based  on 

similarities, which are essentially parameters or criteria. 

Further,  the  main  purpose  of  cultural  linguistics  is  the  systematic  and 

detailed  analysis  of  cultural  conceptualizations  using  methods  such  as  cultural 

schemas  and  cultural  categories  that  are  directly  related  to  cognitive  sciences 

and cognitive linguistics (Sharifian, 2017). Vorobyev et al. (2020) also point out 

 
15 

that  the  use  of  framing  and  cognitive  models  in  studying  the  world  around  a 

person  and  their  mentality  can  allow  a more “detailed" analysis. This is due to 

the  fact that only such an approach to better analysing a person's mentality and 

reality  is  able  to  reveal  the  full  ideological  component  of  existing  words  and 

terms that are mental categories (Vorobyev et al., 2020). 

Fatkullina (2017) also defines the following functions as fundamental in 

such a scientific discipline as cultural linguistics: 

-  epistemic; 

Considering  language  as  a  specific  method  of storing knowledge about 

an individual's environment. 

-  cognitive; 

Considering language as a method of cognition of the surrounding world 

by a person. 

Continuing  revealing  the  essence  of  cultural  linguistics,  cultural 

conceptualization and its impact on cultural cognition, which is also the focus of 

the study of the abovementioned scientific discipline, Sharifian (2017) identifies 

the following model: 

-  cultural cognition -> 

-  cultural  conceptualization  (cultural  schemas,  cultural  categories, 

and cultural metaphors) -> 

- 

language (morphosyntax, semantics, and pragmatics). 

This  model  highlights  the  relationship  between  the  three  mentioned 

aspects,  also  emphasizing  their  connection  with  language.  Overall,  cultural 

schemes  allow  people  to  convey  cultural  meanings,  while  cultural  categories 

have  a  completely  opposite  function  and  are  embedded  directly  into  the 

grammatical  system  of  the  language.  The  last  aspect  is  cultural  metaphors, 

which  are  related  to  the  cognitive  conceptualization  of  one  area  in  relation  to 

another. 

 
16 

Based  on  the  above  mentioned  definitions,  cultural  linguistics  in  this 

paper is considered as a sub-discipline of linguistics that has a multidisciplinary 

origin  and  that  explores  the  interconnection  between  language,  culture  and 

conceptualization (in its interconnection with cultural cognition and categories), 

based on cognitive linguistics that is its foundational framework. Therefore, the 

main  objective  is  to  consider  cultural  conceptualization  expressed  through 

cultural schemes, categories and cultural metaphors. 

Further, the paper is to utilise key aspects of both linguo-culturology and 

cultural linguistics, as well as their functions and methods. The main purpose of 

applying  both  aspects  for  the  implementation  of  further  work  is  to  obtain  the 

most comprehensive results. 

1.2. Political Discourse  

Political discourse is a complex sociocultural phenomenon that influences 

various  areas  of  public  life  (Cap,  2023).  While  rhetorical  analysis  of  political 

speech  dates back to the time of Aristotle first works on the significance of the 

delicate  use  of  language  in  politics,  political  discourse  as  a  separate  field  of 

study began to emerge in the mid-twentieth century (Gerasimov & Ilyin, 2002). 

According  to  the  authors,  early  approaches  stem  from  traditional  rhetorical 

studies  and  political communication research, focusing primarily on persuasive 

techniques  and  propaganda  analysis.  These  initial  investigations  examined 

political  speeches  as  isolated  texts,  often  separated  from  their  broader  social 

contexts. During the decades of the 1970s and 1980s, however, such scholars as 

Van  Dijk  (1986)  and  Fairclough  (1992)  expanded  this  view,   studying  the 

specifics  of  how  political discourse represents ideological principles within the 

public  sphere  and  providing  analytical  frameworks  to  the  examination  of  the 

relationships between language, politics and socio-cultural environment.  

In  contemporary  society,  it  has become an incredibly powerful tool used 

to persuade, inform, and manipulate individuals framing political ideologies and 

 
17 

actions,  as  well  as  reflecting  the  essence  of  societal values, beliefs, and norms 

with the use of language, which plays a critical role in shaping perceptions and 

attitudes  within  political  discourse.  This  part  reviews  the  existing  theoretical 

background  on  the  basic  approaches  and  theories  to  the  study  of  political 

discourse.  In  addition,  this  chapter  aims  to  provide  a  detailed  analysis  of  this 

field’s structural components, defining its key features and characteristics.  

First  and  foremost,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  highlight  the 

fundamental  view  on  political  discourse  that  has  been  further  used  and 

developed  in  contemporary  studies.  Classical  rhetorical  theory  outlined  by 

Aristotle  (4th  century  B.C.)  distinguishes  three  forms  of  oratory  that  remain 

relevant 

to  understanding 

the  essence  of  political  discourse: 

judicial, 

deliberative, and epideictic. The former type focuses on past actions and events, 

aiming  to  establish  justice  by  arguing  about the legality of those events (Frost, 

2002). It is typically employed in legal settings, such as courts, where the goal is 

to  convince  judges  of  the guilt or innocence of a party based on evidence. The 

quality of judicial rhetoric depends heavily on the orator’s professional skill and 

ability  to  manage  the  attention  of  the  audience  through  logical  reasoning  and 

emotional engagement. As Reisigl (2008) states, the deliberative genre relates to 

different  views  about  political  decisions  in  the  public  sphere,  usually 

accompanied  with  advising  or  persuading  an  audience  about  future  actions  or 

policies,  while  the  epideictic  genre  focuses  on  the  verbalisation  of  political 

values, usually praising or blaming political agendas and achievements. 

  While this classical framework helps determine the communicative goal 

of  political  speeches,  contemporary  scholars  (Fairclough,  2012;   Wilson  & 

Boxer,  2015;  Sukhanov,  2018;  et  al.)  argue  that  it  is  insufficient  for 

understanding  the dynamics of modern political texts, extending it with the use 

of other scientific disciplines. A transdisciplinary approach combining rhetorical 

theory,  political  science,  linguo-cultural  approach  and  discourse  analysis  is 

 
18 

necessary  for  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  language  employed  in  political 

discourse to transmit hidden meanings. 

Next,  it  is  necessary  to  outline  various  frameworks  on  the  definition  of 

the  political  discourse  presented  in  the  research  field,  as  it  is  a  polysemantic 

concept comprising a variety of approaches (Beaugrande, 1997). It encompasses 

the  language  used  in political contexts, including speeches, debates, and media 

representations.  According  to  the  author,  political discourse contains particular 

structures  and  activities  that  utilise  specific  collections  of  words  to  reflect 

human thought and social reality. From this perspective, the connection between 

language and societal and cultural constituencies is emphasised.  

Isabela  Fairclough  and  Norman  Fairclough  (2012),  developing  the ideas 

of Norman Fairclough’s first publication, define political discourse as a form of 

social  practice  where  language  is  used  to  demonstrate  power,  construct 

ideologies, and maintain dominance. According to this view, political discourse 

is  not  neutral,  but  reflects  and  reinforces  power  structures.  The  Fairclough 

approach  to  political  discourse  analysis  integrates  critical  discourse  analysis 

(CDA)  with  argumentation  theory,  offering  a  transdisciplinary  method  for 

examining  political  texts  and  practices.  Their  approach  later  expands  on 

Norman  Fairclough’s  (1992)  earlier  CDA  framework,  which  analyses  political 

discourse through three interconnected dimensions: 

1.  Text analysis: 

-  Linguistic  analysis  of  vocabulary,  grammar,  metaphors,  and  rhetorical 

strategies; 

-  Examines  linguistic  cues  that  are  used  to  construct  ideological positions 

and  persuade  audiences  (e.g.,  stylistic  devices,  expressive  means  of 

language, rhetorical appeals, etc.). 

2.  Discourse practice (analysis): 

-  Focuses  on  text  production,  distribution,  and  consumption  by  the 

audience. 

 
19 

-  Analyses  intertextuality  (how  texts  reference  other  discourses)  and 

interdiscursivity (mixing of genres or styles). 

-  Examines  the  texts’  or  speeches’  relation  to  other  texts  or  speeches,  i.e. 

identifies hidden meanings, backgrounds, references, emotional density.  

3.  Social practice (analysis): 

- 

Investigates how discourse reproduces or challenges power structures. 

-  Connects 

linguistic  choices 

to  broader  societal 

ideologies  and 

interactions,  cultural  norms  and  activities,  political  statements  and 

ideologies. 

Another  viewpoint  on  political  discourse  implies  that  understanding  a 

nation’s political discourse requires an examination of its political culture, and it 

is  crucial  to  study  socio-cultural  context  when  analysing  discourse,  since  it  is 

impossible  to  differentiate  between  the  actual  and  hidden  meanings  of  the 

utterance  if  a  viewer  is  isolated  from  the cultural context (Bystrov, 2024). It is 

interesting  to  note  that  some  of  the  key  features  that  characterise  American 

political  discourse  are  outlined  by  the  author,  including  societal  heterogeneity 

and  a  pronounced  degree  of  political  contention.  As  Guan  and  Zhao  (2016) 

states,  a  human  uses  language  as  a  communicative  tool  and  the  members  of 

society utilise the meaning of words to communicate with each other according 

to  the  sociocultural  model  of  the  nation.  This  perspective  is  necessary  to  take 

into  account  when  conducting  the  analysis of political speeches, since they are 

directly related to the cultural and political events happening in the country, and 

are aimed at persuading and affecting the listeners’ mindset and thoughts.  

  Almahasees  & Mahmoud (2022) define political discourse as inherently 

ideological,  serving  as  a  tool  for  the  expression  of  power  relations  negotiated 

through  language.  They  also  support  the  Fairclough  approach  highlighting  the 

role  of  Critical  Discourse  Analysis  (CDA)  in  uncovering  these  underlying 

ideologies.  

 
20 

Political  discourse  is  a  paramount  element  of  each  society  that  shapes 

public  opinion,  impacts  policy-making  and  facilitates  the  communication 

between  the  politicians  and  citizens  (Kannan,  2020).  Therefore, it is necessary 

to  pay  attention  to  its  key  functions  and  goals.  First  of  all,  the  persuasive 

function  is  to  be  presented.  The  study  conducted  by  Almahasees  & Mahmoud 

(2022)  suggests  that  the  primary  goal  of  political  discourse  is  to  persuade 

audiences,  manipulate viewpoints, and frame policies with the use of particular 

techniques  (linguistic,  rhetorical,  etc.).  Second  of  all,  political  discourse  plays 

an  essential  role  in shaping politicians’ social identities and a preferable image 

that  fits societal views and norms (Reyes, 2015). Next, political discourse aims 

to resolve conflicts and soften the real state of things by framing issues in a way 

that  fosters  agreement  or understanding among differing parties (Reyes, 2015). 

Last but not least, it is important to mention the function of public engagement. 

Political  speeches  include  various  linguistic  clues  (e.g.,  questions,  emotional 

appeals,  call  to action statements, manipulation, public addresses) that promote 

discussions  on  policies  and  governance,  as  well  as  encourage  public 

participation  and create the sense of involvement into the democratic processes 

(Renwick & Fieldhouse, 2023). 

Having  covered  different  approaches  to  defining  political  discourse  and 

its main functions, it is also vital to outline the key elements that are employed 

in  political  speeches  in  order  to  make  the  functions  perform  their  main  goals. 

Political  discourse  appears  in  both  written  and  oral  forms,  each  with  distinct 

characteristics  and  impacts.  The  former  includes  government  reports,  policy 

documents,  and  articles,  while  the  latter  comprises  speeches,  debates, 

interviews,  and  other  public  addresses (Bystrov, 2024). Contemporary political 

discourse  is  also  extending  to  digital  media  platforms.  For  instance,  online 

discussion  forums  and  social  media  posts,  which  have  transformed  and 

expanded  the  ways  of  how  political  utterances  are  conveyed  and  received 

(Fairclough & Fairclough, 2012).  

 
 
21 

A  political  speech  is  a  formal  address  delivered  by  a  political  figure, 

activist, or leader to influence public opinion, advocate for policies, or mobilise 

support  for a cause or candidate (Atkinson, 1984). In general, the classification 

of  political  speeches  varies  depending  on  the  sphere  within  which  they  are 

delivered (Reisigl, 2008). The author explains that each political activity can be 

accompanied  with  particular  types  of  speeches  that  are  appropriate  for  the 

communicative goal of the activity. For instance, the utterances produced by the 

parties  and  governmental  bodies  (e.g.,  the  congress  or  parliament)  can  be 

classified  into  their  election  campaigns,  debates,  conferences,  announcements, 

formal discussions, and interviews each with distinct communicative situations. 

What  is  more,  according  to  the  outlined  classification,  public  demonstrations, 

processions,  banners  and  slogans  are  another  type  of  political  texts  and 

speeches.  

Among  the  main  types  of  presidential  speeches  in  political  discourse, 

which  are the main units of this study’s analysis, scholars (Fanani, et al., 2019; 

Hann,  2024)  point  out  election speeches that outline the politicians’ vision and 

goals;  campaign  speeches  that  are aimed at persuading voters during elections, 

transmitting  policy proposals or criticising opponents. Additionally, the authors 

outline  policy  speeches  as  a  separate  type  of  presidential  speeches  within  the 

political  discourse that focus on clarifying and defending specific legislation or 

governmental  agendas,  and  finally,  victory  and  concession  speeches  that  are 

delivered post-election to accept defeat or celebrate victory, emphasising shared 

achievement, unity and reinforcing presidential position.  

Regarding  the  features  of  political  speeches,  the  authors  (Fanani  et  al., 

2019) highlight, first of all, persuasive rhetoric as a distinct and significant part 

of  each of the mentioned types of speeches in political discourse. According to 

the  authors,  political  leaders  implement  pathos,  ethos,  and  logos  to  establish a 

close  and  credible  connection  with  the  audience,  and  intensify  the  emotional 

impact. Second of all, the importance of a structured and thoroughly constructed 

 
 
22 

narrative  and  storytelling  techniques  is  emphasised.  Political  speeches  often 

capture personal stories, anecdotes, historical and cultural references (allusions) 

to make arguments relatable and persuasive. Third of all, the authors claim that 

the  shifts  between  inclusive  (‘we’,  ‘the  people’)  and  exclusionary  (‘us  against 

them’)  language  are  worth  paying  attention  to,  since  these  tools  construct 

certain political identities or succinctly promote political policies. Finally, these 

types  of  speeches   are  characterised  by  symbolic representations of power and 

authority,  as  well  as  by  framing  devices  used  to  construct  particular 

interpretations of reality and manipulate public opinions.  

Further on, the peculiarities of pre-election and victory speeches are to be 

examined  in  detail  since  they  are  the  subject  of  the  given  study.  Pre-election 

speeches serve as persuasive tools through which candidates present their vision 

and  seek  electoral  support  (Zakoyan,  2014).  Analysing  this  aspect,  Antonova 

(2011)  outlined  distinct  characteristics  that  pre-election  speeches  share.  First 

and foremost, pre-election speeches contain special etiquette phrases, i.e. formal 

greetings  and  expressions  of  appreciation  to  the  audience.  Another  important 

feature is the prognostic character of such speeches, meaning that they typically 

focus on the future with the emphasis on the candidate’s vision and plans. Next, 

the author states that promise (i.e. commitments about future actions if elected) 

is  a  central  communicative  goal  in  pre-election  speeches.  Thus,  such speeches 

usually have numerous grammatical and lexical repetitions, as well as appeals to 

emotions  and  references  (allusions).  Last  but  not  least,  these  speeches  include 

persuasive  segments  (manipulative  microtexts)  designed  to  impact  voters’ 

behaviour.  

As for the victory speech, Raesky and Novitri (2023) define it as a formal 

address delivered by a political candidate or leader after winning an election. Its 

primary  purpose  is  to  celebrate  success,  unify  supporters,  and  outline  a  vision 

for  future governance. Moving on, the authors point out victory speeches serve 

as a tool of emphasising gratitude, humility, and collective purpose to foster the 

 
23 

winner’s mandate and  reinforce national or communal unity through the actions 

and  language  used  to  transmit  them.  Additionally,  the  authors  outline 

conciliatory  tone,  high  emotional  density,  inclusive  language  and  symbolic 

gestures as distinct characteristics of the victory speeches. 

Political  discourse  encompasses  both  linguistic  and  extralinguistic 

dimensions,  functioning  as  a  complex  system  of  socially  significant 

meaning-making.  Political  actions  and  the  language  used  to  transmit  them  are 

under  the  study  of  Political  Discourse  Theory  (PDT)  that  is  a  framework  for 

analysing  how  language and communication shape political realities, identities, 

and  power  relations  (Böhm  et al., 2010). It is rooted in the idea that social and 

political  phenomena  are  not  fixed  or  given,  but  are  constructed  and  made 

meaningful  through  discourse  and  the  ways people talk about and interpret the 

world  and  culture  around  them.  Political  Discourse  Theory  (PDT)  considers 

discourse  as  a comprehensive structure that includes both language and actions 

accompanying  the  utterance  (Glynos et al., 2009). This perspective emphasises 

that  political  discourse  is  not  merely  a  text  but  also  encompasses  context, 

actions, and social interactions that collectively generate meaning. 

Political  Discourse  Theory  is  characterised  by  several  core  principles 

(Böhm  et  al.,  2014).  Firstly,  social and political objects (institutions, identities, 

policies)  are  constructed  under  the  influence  of  discourse.  Truth  or  reality  in 

politics  are  the  result  of  ongoing  processes  of  meaning-making  by  individuals 

and  groups.  Secondly,  political meanings and social structures are not fixed, as 

they are dependent on historical and contextual factors. This means that what is 

considered  ‘normal’  in  politics  can  change  over  time.  Thirdly,  language  is  the 

primary  tool  through  which  people  make sense of political life. PDT examines 

how  political  leaders  use  language  to  frame  issues,  legitimise  their  authority, 

and  justify  policies.  Political  speeches  are  seen  as  key  elements  where  such 

framing  occurs,  shaping  public perceptions and political realities. Furthermore, 

PDT  draws  attention  to  rhetorical  strategies  in  political  speeches,  such  as 

 
24 

emphasising  ‘our’  positive  actions  and ‘their’ negative actions, which are used 

to persuade, polarise, or unify audiences (Van Dijk, 2006). 

In conclusion, political discourse is a dynamic and complex phenomenon 

that simultaneously reflects and shapes society's ideological, cultural and social 

dimensions.  The  interrelation  of  language,  power,  and  cultural  context 

highlights  the  necessity  of  a  transdisciplinary  approach  for  its  analysis,  as  no 

single theoretical perspective can fully capture the complexity and effectiveness 

of  political  utterances.  The  analysis  of  political  discourse  is  essential  to 

understanding  the  processes  by  which  political  realities  and  ideologies  are 

created  and  affected  with  the  use  of  language  and  cultural  connotations 

embedded in it in the modern world. 

1.3. Linguistic and Cultural analysis 

Based  on  the  established  definitions  of  both  linguo-culturology  and 

cultural  linguistics,  as  well  as  their  objectives  and  main  units  under  study,  it 

becomes possible to proceed directly to the analysis that is carried out within the 

framework  of  these  two  scientific  disciplines.  To  begin  with, it is necessary to 

explore  the  essence  of  the  analysis  within  each  of  the  approaches,  as  well  as 

their methods and features. 

Linguo-cultural  analysis  examines  units  that  have  acquired  a  certain 

symbolic  meaning  and  that are culturally-defined as a result of their process of 

formation  and  further  development  (Butenko,  2008).  Maslova  (2001), 

considering the internal structure of this approach to analysis, also highlights the 

importance of cultural universals. These are the same or common to all cultures, 

regardless  of  historical  differences,  fundamental  structures  or  approaches  in 

certain areas of human life (Petrova & Petrov, 2025). For example, the presence 

of  language  as  a  way  of  expressing  thought  and  spiritual  aspects,  myths, 

legends,  and  others.  The  relevance  of  focusing  on  cultural  universals  is  also 

 
25 

identified  by  the  fact  that  they  serve  as  a  base  for  the  creation  of  ideological 

references in regard with different epochs (Maslova, 2001). 

For a full-fledged comprehension of the nature of the analysis within the 

framework  of the linguo-culturology, it is crucial to understand that the studied 

linguistic units may be different in the way they embody symbolic information. 

Based on this idea, Telia (2005) argues that such units can be of two types: 

-  denotative; 

This  is  a  definition  that,  according  to  the  approach,  is  associated  with  the 

designation of concepts of material, spiritual and social culture. 

-  connotative. 

This  is  an  additional  evaluative  definition  that  reflects  a  culturally  determined 

meaning. 

Therefore, within the framework of linguo-culturology, both aspects are 

considered,  since  they  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  transmission  of  cultural 

meaning  (culturally  determined  symbolic  meaning).  At  the  same  time,  in  the 

process  of  analysing  a  connotative  meaning,  it  is  also  important  to  take  into 

account the context of the use of the linguistic unit. 

Considering  culturally-loaded  linguistic  units,  the  study of which is the 

main  objective of linguo-cultural analysis, it is significant to note some aspects 

of  their  representation  in  discourse  (Maslova,  2001).  Namely,  that  the  studied 

units have the following forms, regardless of the speaker's communicative goal: 

-  separate words and expressions; 

-  phrases; 

-  proverbs and sayings; 

-  phraseological units; 

-  set expressions. 

In  total,  there  are  9  main  units  that  are  under  research  in  the 

linguo-cultural  approach  (see  Appendix,  Table  9.),  but  all  of  them  (which  are 

 
26 

linguistic  units  rather  than  systems  of  using  a  certain  type  of  discourse  and 

stylistic device of speech) have one of the established forms. 

Vorobyev  (2006),  discussing  linguo-cultural  units  (i.e.  individual  signs 

and the meanings they have) in the process of their functioning in speech, noted 

the  importance  of  studying  not  only  speakers  who  transmit  and load linguistic 

units  with  a  certain  meaning,  but  also  those  who  decode  these  messages. This 

point  of  view,  which  emphasises  the  importance  of  interpretation  and  correct 

decoding,  is  supported  by  the  structure  of  the  semiotic  analysis  of  signs  and 

systems  in  general.  Overall, there are 3 stages or levels of this kind of analysis 

(Lantsevskaya, 2022): 

-  syntactic; 

At  this  level,  the  relationship  between  signs  and  the  ways  they  are 

introduced into discourse is explored, depending on the communicative task. 

-  semantic; 

At  this  level,  the  meaning,  content,  and  information  that  a  sign  can 

convey are explored. 

-  pragmatic. 

This  level  examines the relationship between the author, who has given 

a sign a certain meaning, and the listener or reader who interprets this message. 

Butenko  (2008)  supports  the  idea  proposed  by  Vorobyev  (2006)  about 

the  importance  of considering the semantic content of the studied units and the 

contextual relations, in other words, the pragmatic aspect. This is due to the fact 

that  with the implementation of this integrated approach it becomes possible to 

obtain  maximum  knowledge  about  the  cultural  meanings  that  have  been 

embedded in the symbolic system of linguistic units. 

Further,  moving  to  the  cultural  aspect  of  the  analysis,  Maslova  (2001) 

denotes the importance of studying the following notions: 

-  social  rules  and  norms  (those  that  take  place  in  real  life  and are 

transmitted, and those that are only expected to take place); 

 
27 

-  social  values  (they  are  formed  under  the  influence  of  religion, 

politics and social spheres of society). 

On  the  basis  of  these  two  components,  the  discourse  is  evaluated  or 

qualified  as  “worthy  or  unworthy”,  as  well  as  “accepted  or  not  accepted" 

(Maslova, 2001). 

Fatkullina  (2017),  debating  about  the  importance  of  correctly  defining 

the  essence  of  the  cultural  aspect  in  linguo-cultural  analysis,  puts  forward  a 

theory about 3 variations of the manifestation of this phenomenon. In particular, 

these are: 

-  culture is a special social environment that is created by a person in 

the course of historical development; 

-  culture  is  a  manifestation  of  the  collective  creative  activity  of 

human communities, namely certain nations; 

-  culture  is  a  symbolic  system,  the  separate  units  of  which  are 

objects  and  phenomena  of  both  material  and  immaterial  nature 

(which give meaning to certain social groups).  

In addition, based on the key characteristics of culture, the author argues 

that  there  are  2  most  extensive  areas  where  it  is  possible  to  note  a  correlation 

between  language  utilised  and  the  cultural  heritage  or  background  of  the 

speaker. For this reason, they are an integral part of the linguo-cultural analysis. 

These are the following aspects: 

-  analysis (presence) of a cultural background; 

These  are  nominative  units,  namely  words  and  phraseological  units,  which 

denote events from historical and social life relevant to a particular cultural and 

linguistic community. 

-  analysis (presence) of a "cultural memory". 

These are associations that are set by a specific linguistic unit and are related to 

the historical use of the unit, creating a new modern meaning. 

 
28 

Taking  into  consideration  all  of  the  abovementioned,  linguo-cultural 

analysis  is  the  study  of  linguistic  units  that  have  acquired  their  symbolic 

meaning,  as  well  as  culturally-defined  meaning  as  a  result  of  social 

development.  A  separate  part  of  the  study  is  the  interpretation  of  these  units, 

taking  into  account both the context and other external factors (for example, to 

whom  the  letter  is  addressed,  cultural  background  of  the  speaker,  and  others). 

Cultural  universals  are  also  under  the  focus  of  the  analysis,  as  they  convey  a 

certain symbolic meaning (Vorobyev, 2006; Butenko, 2008; Maslova, 2001). 

Continuing  with  cultural  linguistics,  it  is  important  to  note  that  this 

approach  to  analysis  is  more  extensive  in  its  scope,  since  it  is  associated  with 

the  study  of  cognitive  aspects  of  language.  For  this  reason,  this  scientific 

discipline  has  a  number of features that affect the research process (Rahimova, 

2024). 

Starting with the definition, cultural linguistics analysis explores broader 

lexical  units  and  is  aimed  not  just  at  decoding  the  transmitted  message,  but at 

systematizing  the  “speaker-audience”  chain  in  relation  to  various  images (Gao 

& Feng, 2014). Langacker (1994) also argued that the analysis conducted within 

the  framework  of  this  approach  is  based  not  only  on  lexical  units,  but  also on 

facets of grammar. This approach was reflected in the work of Sharifian (2017), 

who claimed that the use of certain grammatical structures is directly related to 

cultural  conceptualizations  and  is  a  reflection  of  the  speaker's  cultural 

background. 

According  to  Gao  &  Feng  (2014),  the  study  of  the  role  of  images  in 

general  is  one  of  the  priorities  of  cultural  linguistics,  since  words  acquire 

commonly  accepted  meanings  as  a  result  of  their correlation with images. The 

founder of the idea of this interconnection was Palmer (1996), who proposed the 

theory  that  language  as  a  phenomenon  is  only  a  “game”  of  verbal  or  speech 

symbols  based  on  imagery.  At  the  same  time,  the  author  emphasises  that  the 

notion  of  imagery  is  not  limited  only  to  the  visual  component,  but  also  has  a 

 
phonetic  component.  Moreover,  this  concept  also  includes  such  aspects  as 

29 

(Palmer, 1996): 

-  patterns of images; 

-  social scenarios; 

-  cognitive models. 

The  latter  is  also  highlighted  by  Gao  &  Feng  (2014),  arguing  that  the 

process  of  words  acquiring  their  meanings  is  part  of  the  interpretation  of  the 

obtained information in the framework of the cognitive model, which is formed 

under the influence of a certain social and cultural environment. 

Discussing image analysis, Palmer (1996) emphasises that since cultural 

linguistics  is  a  synthesis  of  cognitive  and  anthropological  linguistics,  it  is 

possible  to  apply  the  methods  of  its  constituent  approaches  within  the 

framework  of  the  analysis conducted within this scientific discipline. Thus, the 

following analysis system is distinguished, which consists of 3 key stages: 

1.  3 main approaches in anthropology -> 

-  boasian linguistics 

This approach considers language as a reflection not only of culture, but also of 

the  mentality  of  representatives  of  certain  nations  (Salamh  &  Maalej,  2018). 

According  to  the  authors,  it  also  proposes  the  idea  that  the  representation  of 

experience  in  languages  varies,  which  creates  linguistic  categories.  The  latter 

have  a  direct  impact  on  the  way  people  think  in  regard  with  their  language 

groups  and  cultures.  In  fact,  this  idea  of  “language-culture”  chain  became  the 

basis  for  further  studies  conducted  by  such  scientists  as  Edward  Sapir  and 

Benjamin Lee Whorf. 

-  ethnosemantics 

This  approach  considers  language  as  a  reflection  of culture in connection with 

the  characteristics  inherent  in  a  particular  ethnic  group  (Leavitt,  2014). 

Therefore,  it  examines  how  ethnicity  can  affect  the  perception  of  information, 

world cognition, as well as influence the idea of imagery. In addition, according 

 
30 

to the author, this approach analyses not only how people organise and structure 

knowledge depending on their nationality, but also how approaches to assigning 

meaning to a word differ. 

-  ethnography of speaking 

This  approach  examines  the  relationship  between  representatives  of  a  certain 

ethnic group and the culturally determined ways of speaking they use (Tarasova, 

2018).  By  the  latter,  the  author  means  both  the  choice  of  certain  linguistic 

means  and  grammatical  structures.  In  this  regard,  it  is  relevant  to  note  that 

Hymes  (1962),  whose  research  served  as  the basis for the further development 

of  the  ethnography  of  speaking,  noted  the  importance  of  communicative 

competence  in  creating  social  relationships. The latter includes both the ability 

to correctly convey an idea or thought, and interpret messages based on who the 

author is, in what historical and time period it is done, and who is the recipient. 

2.  Cognitive linguistics -> 

Cognitive  linguistics  uses  a  variety  of  analytical  tools  from  various  related 

disciplines,  such  as  cognitive  sciences  (Sharifian,  2017).  One  of  the  most 

prominent  examples  is  the  concept  of  schemas,  which  are  considered  to  be an 

abstract  phenomenon  that  determines  the  presence  of  blocks  of  cognition  that 

are  used  to  store,  organise,  and  subsequently  interpret  transmitted  information 

(Bartlett,  1932;  Rumelhart,  1980).  At  the  same  time,  patterns  of  images  are 

considered  as  repetitive  cognitive  structures  that  have  a  direct  impact  on  the 

formation  of  structures  of  thinking,  understanding  information  and  reasoning 

(Sharifian,  2017).  The  author  adds  that  cognitive  structures  inherently  have 

different  ways  of  representation,  including conceptual metaphors. With the use 

of the latest, it becomes possible to conceptualise and understand the essence of 

one  conceptual  area  through  the  use  of  another.  Palmer  (1996)  argued  that 

conceptual metaphors are based on cultural characteristics, and therefore unique 

to  each  nationality.  For  example,  such  metaphorical  phrases  as  “thin-skinned” 

 
31 

and  “thick-skinned"  use  conceptual  metaphors  in  the  meaning  of  skin  as  a 

person's armor or protective layer. 

3.  Cultural linguistics. 

Palmer  (1996)  highlighted  that  integrating  cognitive  linguistics  with 

anthropological  frameworks  enriches  cultural  linguistics’  analytical  approach 

and  expands  its  interdisciplinarity  Sharifian  (2017)  further  supported  the  idea 

that  the discipline’s qualitative methodologies enhance its effectiveness in such 

contexts  as  intercultural communication and political discourse analysis, where 

culturally grounded conceptualizations are numerous. 

Taking into consideration all of the abovementioned, cultural linguistics 

analysis  is  the  study  of  language  as  a  system  of  symbols  and  images  that  are 

directly  related  to  both  the process of thinking and cognitive structures in their 

various  manifestations  (for  example,  conceptual  metaphors).  Moreover,  the 

examination  organised  within  the  framework  of  this  approach  focuses  on both 

lexical  units  that  have  a  culturally  determined  meaning  and  grammatical 

structures, the use of which is justified by social norms and established rules in 

society.  

For  the  analysis  to  be  the  most  extensive  in its scope and detailed, this 

paper is to implement a synthesis of linguo-culturology and cultural linguistics - 

linguistic  and cultural approach or linguistic and cultural analysis. This implies 

the integration of basic analytical tools and techniques, as well as a combination 

of  the  research  items,  namely  linguistic  units  with culturally-loaded meanings, 

conceptual metaphors as a way to reveal cultural identity, and the use of certain 

grammatical  structures  in order to reflect social norms and rules established by 

society.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  analysis  includes  not  only  verbal 

variations of speech, but also non-verbal cues implemented by speakers. 

Developing  the  idea  of  why  verbal  and  non-verbal  methods  of 

transmitting information come under study within the framework of a linguistic 

and  cultural  approach,  it  is  important  to  note  that  they  are  both  ways  of 

 
32 

communication.  Moreover,  these  methods  are  among  the  most  complex  and 

crucial  cognitive  processes  that  take  place  in  the  human  mind  (Mammadzada, 

2023).  Thus,  their  analysis  makes  it  possible  to  trace  not  only  how  thinking 

formed  within  the  framework  of  one  ethnic  group  affects  the  methods  of 

interaction  used,  but  also  to  trace  the  cultural  background  of  the  speaker.  The 

presence  of  the  latter  is  due to the fact that the unit of interaction in the verbal 

method  of  communication  is  language,  which  is  a  representation  of  changing 

social  norms  (Jiang,  2017).  In  the  case  of  non-verbal  ways  of  transmitting 

information,  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  the  so-called  “hidden”  meaning, 

which  is  a  reflection of culture in language, as well as in the existing norms of 

behavior (Jiang, 2017; Hui & Luchinskaya, 2024; Touaoula, 2017). 

Having  a  generalised  understanding  of  the  two  main  types  of 

communication,  it  is possible to consider each separately and identify the main 

techniques  used  within  each  of  them.  Starting  with  the  verbal  way  of 

interaction,  Khasanova  (2015)  argues  that  this  method  is  information  delivery 

through  the  use  of  language  as  a  system  of  signs  and  meanings.  Sinelnikova 

(2022) clarifies that this transfer can be expressed by the exchange of thoughts, 

ideas, and no less importantly by the emotional components of the speaker (such 

as happiness, doubts, and insecurities). At the same time, Aripova (2023) notes 

that  direct  communication  or  the  process  of  information  exchange  is  the  final 

stage in the verbal communication model, which has the following structure: 

- 

information; 

Under the influence of human cognitive activity, a message is transformed into a 

specific code (word) and transmitted in the format of a discourse or text. At the 

same time, each language has a number of ready-made codes, the use of which 

varies  depending  on  the  communicative  task.  It  is  important  to  note  that  such 

combinations  do  not convey strictly loaded information units, since their use is 

conditioned by the formal norms of society. For instance, welcome and farewell 

phrases.  In  addition,  it  is  also  essential  to identify that different messages may 

 
33 

also have various communicative structure and load. One of such cases is when 

messages  with  a  high  information  load  have  a  complex  language  or  the 

terminology.  Due  to  that  reason  it  is  necessary  to  have  additional  knowledge 

about  the realms in order to correctly decode the idea being transmitted (e.g., a 

pre-election  speech  or  a  scientific  article).  On  the  contrary, there are messages 

with  a  low  information  load,  which  have  the  opposite  structure  and  which  are 

often used together with non-verbal codes in the form of gestures (e.g., waving 

during a friendly conversation with a neighbor). 

-  communication means; 

This aspect has code and signal formats. A code refers to a sign system that can 

transmit  a message from one signal system to another. The primary code in the 

process of verbal communication is considered to be an ordinary language and a 

system of grammatical and pragmatic rules that can be applied to it. Further, it is 

important 

to  distinguish  between  non-verbal  and  verbal  codes  of  a 

non-linguistic  sign  system.  The  latter  implies  the  use  of  gestures  as  a 

complementary  unit  of information transmission (e.g., to point at an object and 

say  “This  one").  At  the  same  time,  signals  are  considered  to  be  the  physical 

capabilities  of  each  person  using  the  senses  to  perceive  information.  For 

example,  to  recognize  sound  waves  and  identify  meaningful  speech (message) 

in them. 

-  communication network; 

This aspect is expressed in the “speaker-listener” and “encoder-decoder" chains. 

To  begin with, it is crucial to distinguish the medium (means) of transmitting a 

message  from  the  channel  used  to  do  it.  The  term  means  of  communication 

traditionally  refers  to  verbal  methods,  which  have  two  formats  of  speech 

presentation,  namely  oral  or written. At the same time, a message transmission 

channel  refers  to a type of physical data transmission, namely sound vibrations 

(sound),  smell,  and  others.  Depending  on  its  category,  the  type  of  contact 

between  the two sides of the communication may vary. The latter can be direct 

 
34 

(live communication) or mediated (using electronic devices or other units as an 

intermediary) and a monologue (communication is considered to be passive and 

does  not  require  a  response, depending on the situation, the audience decoding 

the  message  may  or  may  not  be  present) or a dialogue (communication occurs 

between  two  or  more  parties,  which  implies  the  presence  of  reaction  from  the 

listeners, as well as the mutual exchange of information). 

-  communicative activity. 

This  aspect  implies  creating  a  message  by  encoding  it  and  only  then 

transmitting it over a communication channel, as well as receiving the message 

and  decoding  it  by  the  recipient.  Based  on  this  system  of  communicative 

activity,  there  is  a  theory  that  it  is  cyclical  in  its  structure  (this  ends  with  the 

transmission  of  the  message  and  begins  with  a  decoding,  followed  by  the 

production  of  a  response  to  it).  At  the  same  time,  it  is  added  that  verbal 

communication  is  a  continuous  process  (i.e.  only  the  recipient  of  the  message 

changes, which makes it the basis of social life. 

Developing  the  idea  of  the  types  of  verbal  communication  mentioned 

above,  there  are  two  main  approaches  that  are  traditionally  distinguished  and 

which also have their own components (Sinelnikova, 2022): 

1.  external speech (occurs between people or groups of people); 

-  written; 

-  oral. 

Both types of external speech can be either monologues or dialogues. 

2.  inner  speech  (communication  takes  place  in  a  person's  mind,  is 

considered part of the thinking process). 

Discovering  oral  verbal  speech  when  interacting  with  other  people, 

Mammadzada  (2023)  notes  that  it  is  divided  into  several  types,  depending  on 

who is the addressee and who will decode it: 

1.  Dyadic communication; 

 
35 

Within  the framework of this type of information transmission, communication 

takes place between two individuals. At the same time, participants can change 

their roles - speaker and listener. 

2.  Small groups communication; 

Within  the framework of this type of information transmission, communication 

occurs  when  more  than  two  people  are  involved.  Depending  on  the  context, 

participants  do  not  always  have  the  opportunity to change their roles - speaker 

and  listener.  In  such a situation, feedback occurs through the use of non-verbal 

methods  of  communication.  For  example, a weekly meeting in an organization 

to  confirm  a  new  content  plan  or  product  may  have  a  discussion  format,  or  it 

may have a “yes or no" voting form. 

3.  Public communication. 

Within  the framework of this type of information transmission, communication 

takes place only if there is a large audience (the number strongly contrasts with 

the  small  groups  communication).  The  main  difference  is  the  communicative 

task, 

the  formality  of  speech,  and 

the  means  of 

interaction.  Public 

communication  is  traditionally  one-sided,  so  the  roles  of  participants  do  not 

change regardless of the context. At the same time, there can be one speaker, as 

well  as  several  of  them,  passing the word to each other in accordance with the 

established  rules  and  program  of  the  meeting  or  event.  This  type  of  verbal 

communication is most common in such manifestations of political discourse as 

pre-election  and  victory  speeches  of  presidents,  mayors  and  members  of 

administration. 

Developing  the  idea  of  a  verbal  way  of  transmitting  data  and  its 

variability  depending  on  the  people  and  culture,  Edward  Hall  notes  the 

importance  of  considering the context where it occurs. By the latter, the author 

means  additional  information  that  is  necessary  to  understand  the  essence  of  a 

particular  culturally-loaded  unit  or  occasion.  It  is  often  manifested  in 

 
36 

comprehending  the  historical  development  of the nation, within the framework 

of which this event took place. 

Taking 

into  consideration  all  of 

the  abovementioned,  verbal 

communication is based on language as a system of signs and meanings, the use 

of  which  is  aimed  at  expressing  thoughts,  ideas  and  emotions  through  a 

message.  The  medium and channel of transmission may vary depending on the 

communicative goal and who it is aimed at. Thus, verbal communication can be 

external,  expressed  in  written  and  oral  speech,  as  well  as  internal,  in  other 

words,  a  manifestation  of  a  person's  thought  process.  Moreover,  this  type  of 

interaction  also  varies  depending  on  the  addressee  or  the  decoder.  Namely,  it 

can  be  dyadic,  among small groups, and public, each with its own components 

and peculiarities. 

In  addition  to  verbal  means  of  transmitting  information,  Mammadzada 

(2023) highlights that human use of non-verbal methods is a natural and integral 

part  of  communication  in  general.  For  this  reason,  the  study  of  these  two 

concepts in the process of interaction between people can serve as a tool to gain 

deeper  knowledge  about  human  cognitive  activity,  the  mutual  influence  of 

language and culture, as well as the structure and function of speech depending 

on the communicative task. 

Moving on to the definition of non-verbal means of communication, Su 

Mon (2017) argues that they refer to the transmission of information without the 

use  of  language,  including  the  use  of  body  movements,  gestures,  facial 

expressions  and  other  tools  that  do  not  represent  the  direct  usage  of  words. 

Mammadzada  (2023)  adds  that  tone  of  voice,  intonation,  pitch,  and  other 

phonetic  features  are  also  an  important  part  of  non-verbal  ways  of  conveying 

information. The author also emphasizes that such methods have a lot of hidden 

meanings that can say even more about the speaker than one’s words. Therefore, 

using a certain pose, facial expressions, and intonation can signal that the other 

person is tense, relaxed, or not at all interested in the conversation. At the same 

 
37 

time, the meaning of gestures is determined by culture and may vary depending 

on nationality. For this reason, it is worth using them with special attention and 

accuracy in cross-cultural communication (Mammadzada, 2023). 

The  variability  of  the  meaning  of  gestures depending on culture is also 

emphasized  by  Aripova  (2023)  in  a  comparative  analysis  of non-verbal means 

such as gestures and human physiological movements. According to the author, 

the  following  aspects  can  be  identified  as  the  main  criteria  for  the  correct 

differentiation: 

-  gesture has a signifier and a signified; 

The presence of these two aspects of a gesture, as opposed to just a movement, 

is  key, despite the fact that the relationship between them is usually considered 

conditional (determined by cultural and social aspects). 

-  gestures express meaning; 

Gestures, unlike accidental movements, have an information code embedded in 

them.  It  is  crucial  to  take  into  account  the  context,  as  it  is  necessary  for  the 

correct  decoding  of  a  non-verbal  message.  For  example,  waving  your  hand 

while  talking  about the wind will make sense, but randomly raising one’s hand 

on the way home because one got bored has no semantic function. 

-  gestures can change meaning. 

This aspect is directly related to the previous two, since the meaning inherent in 

the gesture is traditionally culturally and socially conditioned. At the same time, 

as  mentioned  above,  it  can  change  its  information  load  depending  on 

geographical usage. For example, the “OK” gesture has the meaning of agreeing 

to  something  in  the  USA,  but  at  the  same time it is considered to be offensive 

within the framework of French culture. 

Manusov  (2016)  proposes  a  different  classification,  arguing  that  it  is 

more  correct  to  characterize  non-verbal  communication  methods  based  on 

neurological  factors.  The  author  emphasizes  that  each  communication  system 

 
38 

has  a  direct  connection  with  the  physical  abilities  of  representatives  of  certain 

nationalities. Thus, there are 3 key types of non-verbal communication: 

-  spontaneous communication; 

This aspect implies the idea that there is a certain code of physiological reaction 

(biological  heritage)  that  is  inherent  in  humans  and  that  manifests  itself  in 

various  (not  necessarily  critical)  situations.  For  example,  scratch  a  place  that 

itches,  or  yawn  when  one  wants  to  sleep.  It  is  essential  to  identify  that 

spontaneous  communication  can  be  decoded  by  representatives  of  different 

cultures, regardless of their background. 

-  pseudo-spontaneous communication; 

This  aspect  implies  the  idea  that  there  can  be  a  targeted  use  of  unified 

physiological  gestures  or  actions  in  order  to  achieve  a  desired  result.  For 

example, yawn during a long conversation with a friend to end it quickly. 

-  symbolic communication. 

This  aspect  is  different  from  the  previous  ones  and  implies  the  presence  of  a 

communication  system  that  only  representatives  of  one  culture  can  decode  in 

the  correct  way.  This  means  that  symbolic  communication,  as  it  was  already 

established  within  the  framework  of  the  abovementioned  classifications,  can 

vary depending on nationality and culture in general. 

The  theory  of  the  correct  use of non-verbal methods of communication 

is  proposed  by  Avazova  (2024),  emphasizing  that  knowledge  of  how  to 

correctly  encode  and  decode  a  message  of  this  type  is  a  skill  that  needs  to  be 

developed. Based on this, the concept of “non-verbal sensitivity” was created. It 

is used to denote the ability to detect the use of non-verbal signals by a speaker 

and  interpret  them  correctly,  taking  into  account  the  context  of  the  message 

being  transmitted.  It  is  also  important  to  note  that  the  development  of  such  a 

skill  as  “non-verbal  sensitivity"  should  take  place  in  a  narrowly  focused 

environment,  for  example,  with  an  orientation  on  gestures, intonation or facial 

expressions.  Revealing  the  essence  of encoding, Avazova (2024) notes that the 

 
39 

ability 

to  formulate 

information  correctly  using  non-verbal  means  of 

communication at the right moment of speech is no less difficult. It is applicable 

to  both  spontaneous  actions  and  premeditated  or  rehearsed  ones. According to 

the author, it is crucial to identify that traditionally a person's ability to correctly 

encode  non-verbal  units  is  directly  related  to  the  cultural  background  and  the 

expressivity  of  emotions  inherent  in  one’s  nationality.  At  the  same  time, 

Manusov  (2016)  notes  that  having  a  well-developed  skill  in  decoding 

non-verbal  messages  does  not  mean  that  a  person  can  also  encode  such  units 

properly (and vice versa). 

Taking  into  consideration  all  of  the  abovementioned,  it  is  possible  to 

make a conclusion that non-verbal communication is based on the transmission 

of  a  message  without  using  language,  and  with  a  focus  on  gestures,  facial 

expressions,  phonetic  features,  and  others.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  crucial  to 

distinguish between physiological movements and information-loaded ones, i.e. 

gestures.  The  latter  also  vary  in  their  meaning,  but  are  traditionally associated 

with  a  person's  culture  and  nationality.  Moreover,  non-verbal  interaction  may 

differ  depending  on  the  communicative  goal,  namely,  it  can  be  spontaneous, 

pseudo-spontaneous  and  symbolic.  Further,  the  correct  encoding  and decoding 

of a transmitted message of this type is a skill, the development of which is also 

related to the cultural background of a person. However, the ability to correctly 

interpret  non-verbally  transmitted  information  does  not  imply  that  the  same 

person can also expressively use emotionally-loaded units oneself. Overall, such 

communication methods are the most powerful tools that can be used in order to 

influence and manipulation an auditory, and which are based on the literate use 

of a system of non-verbal signs (Avazova, 2024; Aripova, 2023; Mammadzada, 

2023; Manusov, 2016; Su Mon, 2017). 

The combination of verbal and non-verbal communication methods adds 

emotionality and expressivity to speech (both written and oral) and allows for a 

greater  impact  on  the  listener  or  audience  (Mammadzada,  2023).  Aripova 

 
40 

(2023),  developing  the  idea  of  the  importance  of  synthesizing  these  two 

approaches, argues that only their joint study makes it possible to determine the 

communicative intention set by the speaker, as well as to correctly interpret the 

embedded message. 

According 

to  Mammadzada 

(2023),  verbal 

and  non-verbal 

communication  methods  are  complementary  to  each  other  and  possess  the 

following functions: 

-  regulation; 

This aspect is related to the possibility of non-verbal methods to coordinate the 

interaction process by expressing internal tension, as well as other emotions and 

feelings during communication for its successful completion. 

-  completion; 

This  aspect  is  related  to the correlation of verbal and non-verbal means for the 

completion and integrity of the transmitted message by filling it with expressive 

units. The primary aim of it is to achieve a specific communicative goal. 

-  substitution; 

This  aspect  is  related  to  the  fact  that  in  certain  situations  and  contexts,  verbal 

and  non-verbal  methods are considered to be not only complementary, but also 

interchangeable.  Thus,  one  gesture  can  replace  an  entire  phrase,  while  words 

reveal the meaning of a message better than a specific gesture. 

-  refusal. 

This aspect is related to the fact that sometimes a person experiences dissonance 

during  communication,  and  due  to  this  reason,  verbal  and  non-verbal methods 

may  contradict  each  other.  For  example,  when  a  person  nods,  supporting  an 

expressed  idea,  and  at  the  same  time  says  “No,  of  course,  such  an  act  is 

unacceptable, I agree”. 

Sobirova  (2021)  identifies  these  functions  as  methods,  and  adds  that 

non-verbal  ways  of  transmitting  information  are  more  emotionally  loaded  and 

traditionally  convey  additional  meaning  that  is  important  for  the  context.  In 

 
41 

addition  to  the  aspects  proposed  by  Mammadzada  (2023),  the  author  also 

highlights the following methods: 

-  repetition; 

This aspect is related to the fact that non-verbal tools usually repeat verbal text 

and  thus  make  it  more  expressive  and  easy  to  understand.  For  example,  when 

using  the  word  “extension",  the  gesture  of  spreading  the  arms  to  the  sides  is 

used. 

-  emphasis. 

This  aspect is related to the fact that non-verbal units are traditionally aimed at 

highlighting  individual  words  and  ideas  in  verbal  speech,  thereby  focusing 

listeners' attention on specific ideas. 

Expressivity  and  emotionality,  according  to  Safina  (2017),  are  an 

integral  part  of  verbal  and  non-verbal  communication.  This  is  due  to  the  fact 

that  these  approaches  are  types  of  communicative  influence.  Therefore,  the 

main purpose of each of them is to transmit and then inculcate certain messages 

or  ideas  to  decoders.  At  the same time, the author emphasizes that achieving a 

manipulative  goal  is  possible  only  with  the  synthesis  of verbal and non-verbal 

means,  since  the  first  aspect  is  the  basis  for  communication,  while  the  second 

one is considered as an impulse to project emotions. 

1.4. The use of culturally-loaded linguistic devices in political discourse. 

Having  examined  the  nature  of  political  discourse  and  approaches  to  its 

analysis  in  this  research,  namely  linguo-culturology  and  cultural  linguistics 

frameworks,  as  well  as  outlined  their  main  functions  and  classifications,  it  is 

necessary  to focus on the tools that are subjects of the study’s examination and 

that can be used by politicians in their speeches in order to make the utterances 

more persuasive and effective.        

 
42 

Political speeches are strong tools of persuasion where language, culture, 

and  power  converge,  shaping  public  perception  and  reinforcing  ideological 

paradigms  (Bystrov,  2024).  Language  serves  as  the  primary  medium  through 

which  political  ideas  are  communicated.  It  shapes  perceptions  and  can 

manipulate  public  opinion.  According  to  Chilton  (2004,  pp.  38),  ‘language 

creates  politics’,  without  it,  political  activities  would  not  exist.  By  integrating  

linguistic  and  cultural  approach  to  the  analysis  of  presidential  speeches,  this 

research underscores the role of political leaders as representatives of particular 

cultural  backgrounds  and  emphasises  the  importance  of  decoding  cultural 

connotations  transmitted  through  the  use  of  linguistic  features  within  the 

political discourse.  

To  begin  with,  it  is  necessary  to  state  that  this  research  pays  close 

attention  to  all  verbal  and  non-verbal  peculiarities  presented  in  the  analysed 

presidential  speeches.  It  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  chosen  linguistic and 

cultural  approach  to  analysis  by  its  nature  is  aimed  at  providing  a holistic and 

all-encompassing  representation  of  all  key  linguistic  and  cultural  features 

inherent in a person as a representative of a particular culture and nation, and as 

future  leader,  whose  linguistic  choices  directly  influence  public  opinions  and 

decisions.  As  it  has  been  stated  by  Fanani  et  al.  (2019),  the  distinct  feature of 

presidential  speeches  is  structured  and  thoroughly  constructed  narrative  and 

storytelling techniques, the main purpose of which is to affect the audience and 

manipulate  listeners’ perception. This is achieved by employing specific verbal 

and non-verbal tools that frame ideologies and hidden meanings, as well as help 

establish  a  close  emotional  connection  between  the  speaker  and  the  audience. 

Thus, this chapter provides a comprehensive theoretical overview of the devices 

and  features,  conveying  the  peculiar  use  of language and cultural connotations 

implemented  to  enhance  the  effectiveness,  emotional density and credibility of 

 
 
43 

political  speeches,  including  stylistic  devices,  expressive  means  of  language, 

rhetorical strategies, and non-verbal cues. 

First, it is crucial to note that within current research, the terms “stylistic 

devices” and “expressive means of language” are often utilised interchangeably. 

Nevertheless,  although  both  serve  to  enhance  speech  efficiency  and  influence 

audience perception, several key distinctions exist between them that should be 

pointed  out  as  this  study’s  practical  section  treats  these  two  categories 

separately. 

Stylistic  devices,  often  referred  to  as  rhetorical  devices  or  figures  of 

speech,  are  linguistic  tools  used  to  enhance  the  effectiveness,  clarity,  and 

expressiveness of language (Umurzakova, 2022). They encompass a wide range 

of  tools  that  serve  various  functions  in  political  communication,  such  as 

emphasising  key  points,  evoking  emotional  responses,  persuading  listeners  or 

framing issues to correspond to particular agendas.  

By  expressive means of language,   Skrebnev (1994), who introduced the 

unique  approach  on  the classification of expressive means and stylistic devices 

combining  paradigmatic 

and 

syntagmatic  concepts,  

implies 

such 

morphological,  syntactic,  and  word-formative  language  forms  that  serve  for 

emotional  or  logical  strengthening  of  the  speech. Expressive means, according 

to Skrebnev’s classification, refer to a broad category of language tools that help 

express  thoughts,  feelings,  and  emotions  by  implementing  certain  phonetic 

features  (for  instance,  specific  intonation  or  rhythm  patterns),  use  of  effective 

word  ordering,  syntax  (i.e.  peculiar  grammatical  structures  and  choices),  and 

others.  Gurevich   (2022)  states  that  expressive  means  are  often  employed  in 

political  speeches  for  the  purpose  of  adding  emotional,  evaluative  or  logical 

emphasis in communication.  

Stylistic  devices,  on  the  other  hand,  add  expressive,  structural  and 

aesthetic  power,  enhancing  the  persuasive  impact  of  discourse  and  creating 

 
44 

memorable  phrases  (slogans)  that  can  be  further  reflected  in  people’  minds 

(Samatullaev  &  Fayziyeva,  2024).   In  general,  stylistic  devices are a subset of 

expressive  means,  focusing  on  a  narrower,  whilst  more  deliberate  linguistic 

techniques  (e.g.,  metaphors,  allusions,  rhetorical  questions,  hyperboles,  irony, 

and  others)  that  are  utilised  to  accomplish  a  variety  of  communicative  goals, 

including  persuasion  and  manipulation  of  public  opinion  in  the  first  place. 

Despite  the  differences  in  terms  and  functions,  the  scholars  (Dellagnelo  et  al., 

2014)  that  apply  Political  Discourse  Theory  to  the  analysis  of  linguistic  units 

highlight that both expressive means and stylistic devices are deeply intertwined 

with cultural conceptualisations and serve as manipulative tools that reflect and 

reinforce cultural ideologies.  

Further  on,  it  is  necessary  to  analyse  the  expressive  means  and  stylistic 

devices  that  are  employed  specifically  within  political  discourse,  since  in 

accordance  with  the  above  mentioned  theoretical  principles,  they  fall  into  the 

category of culture-specific items that resonate with particular cultural contexts 

or  endow  communication  with  a  high  extent  of  emotionality  or 

manipulativeness,  that  are  subjects  of  analysis  of  cultural  and  linguistic 

approach.  In  their  work  on  specifics  of  political  communication,  Gennaro  & 

Ash  (2022)   define  emotionality  as  a  degree  to  which  emotional  content  or 

effect  is  expressed  in  discourse.  The  authors  highlight  that  this  aspect  plays  a 

crucial  role  in  political  persuasion  and  is  manifested through diverse linguistic 

levels  (i.e.  phonological,  lexical,  syntactic,  and  others),  by  employing  specific 

lexical  choices,  rhetorical  devices,  and  figures  of  speech  that  can  be  analysed 

through various methodological approaches. 

The expressive means, as a broader category of linguistic elements, are to 

be  discussed  first.  According  to  Lungu’s  (2020)  study  on  the  use  of  the 

linguistic  techniques  in  presidential  speeches,  the  expressive  means  utilised  in 

the  realm  of  political  communication  can  be  classified  into  four  main  types: 

morphological, lexical, phraseological, syntactic, and phonetic.  

 
45 

At  the  morphological  level,  the  author  highlights  the  use  of  such 

word-building  means  that  serve  to  make  the  speech  more  expressive  or  to 

intensify the meaning (e.g., diminutives and augmentatives or particular affixes 

characteristic  to  a  political  utterance,  e.g.,  ‘-ism’;  ‘-ology’).  Another  peculiar 

feature  of  this  layer  of  expressive  means  that  is  often  employed  in  political 

communication  is  the  use  of  Present  Indefinite  instead  of  the  Past  Indefinite. 

Borysov  and  Vasylieva  (2021)  call  this  technique  ‘historical  Present’  and 

describe  it  as  an  act  of  using  present  tense  to  describe  past  events,  therefore 

providing a more vivid picturisation of what was going on in the past during the 

speech.  In  political  communication,  speakers  use present tenses instead of past 

ones  to intensify past achievements or highlight the strengths of their decisions 

and  actions  (Podoliuc,  2018).  Khajavi  and Rasti (2020) add that this technique 

is  also  used  to  trigger  the  urgency  or  essential  decision  making  in  cases when 

the speaker wants to highlight that the cause of a particular social problem is in 

the  past,  and  the  attempts  to  tackle  the  issue  are  made  right  now.  This  adds 

credibility to the actions of the political figure or future leader.  

Moving  on  to  the  lexical  level,  it  comprises  all  words  with  inner 

expressive  or  emotive  meaning  (Borysov  and  Vasylieva,  2021).  For  example, 

political  speeches  often  include  interjections  (e.g.,  ‘Wow!’)  that  have  only 

emotive  meaning  or  qualitative  adjectives 

(e.g., 

‘revolutionary’  and 

‘impossible’)  that  have  both  referential  and  emotive  implications  that  are  also 

implemented  for  emotional  intensification.  Borysov  and  Vasylieva  (2021)  add 

intensifiers  (e.g.,  ‘very’  and  ‘extremely’),  words  that  are  used  to  amplify 

meaning,  to  this  list  outlining  their  function  of  emphasising  key  points  of  the 

utterance. 

At  the  phraseological  layer,  Borysov  and  Vasylieva  (2021)  identify 

specific collocations, idioms, proverbs and sayings, which constitute a group of 

phraseological  units,  as  subjects  of  analysis.  These  are  a  category  of  fixed, 

non-motivated  set  expressions  whose  meanings  cannot be freely deduced from 

 
the  literal  meanings  of  their  individual  components  (Malinovschi,  2020). 

According  to  Vinogradov’s  traditional  classification  of  phraseological  units 

(1997), they are divided into three main types: 

46 

-  Phraseological 

fusions 

(idioms, 

sayings,  proverbs) 

– 

semantically  indivisible  phraseological  units  (expressions)  whose 

meanings cannot be deduced from their parts or the literal meaning 

of the separate words (e.g., “once in a blue moon”).  

-  Phraseological  unities  –   semantically  indivisible  phraseological 

units, the overall meanings of which can be partially deduced from 

their literal meanings  (e.g., “to fall into a rage”). 

-  Phraseological  combinations  (collocations)  –  special  word 

combinations,  in which one word has a bound meaning (figurative 

only  in  combination  with  another  word)  and  the  other  has  an 

independent one (is used literally). For example, “the golden rule” 

meaning “the important rule.”  

  It  is  crucial  to  highlight  that  these  linguistic  units  are  always 

culturally-loaded,  as  they  encapsulate  and  reflect  unique  values,  beliefs, 

traditions,  historical  experiences,  and  social  norms  of  the  communities  that 

produce and use them. Their meanings often go beyond the literal interpretation 

of the words and are embedded in the cultural context, making them difficult to 

fully understand without knowledge of that culture (Glonti, 2020). Additionally, 

Glonti  (2020),  in  her  work  on  the  use  of  phraseological  units  in  political 

discourse,  considers  idioms  and  proverbs  as  supporting  socio-cultural  tools  of 

persuasion  that  are  utilised  by  political  leaders  to  strengthen  their  ideas  and 

resonate  with  the  listeners’  minds.  As  an  example,  Donald  John  Trump,  who 

sometimes  employs  proverbs  (e.g.,  “The  harder  I  work,  the  luckier  I  get”), 

idioms  (“the  golden  age  of  America”)  and  set expressions (e.g., “think big” or 

“get  even”)  in  his  speeches,  can  be  cited.  These  expressive  means  are  used  in 

such  cases  to  connect  the  speaker  with  the  audience  through  familiar 

 
47 

expressions  of  wisdom  or  culturally resonant language. Moreover, the study of 

these  units  is  a  subject  of  linguistic  and  cultural  analysis,  which  examines  the 

relationship  between  language  and  culture  with  a  focus  on  how language both 

reflects and influences cultural concepts. 

Next,  based  on  the  classification  provided  by  Borysov  and  Vasylieva 

(2021), the expressive means analysed at the syntactic level include:   

-  Ellipsis – an intentional omission of one or more words from a sentence, 

as  their meaning is implied by context (e.g., “To the best campaign team 

and  volunteers  in  the  history  of  politics.  The  best  [the  collocation 

‘campaign  team’ is omitted, since it is implied by the context of the first 

sentence].  The best ever.” – taken from Barack Obama’s victory speech). 

Ellipsis  is  usually  employed  in  political  speeches  for  conciseness  and 

rhythm.  It  encourages  the  audience  to  actively  engage  by  filling  in  the 

gaps  mentally,  which  can 

increase  attention  and 

involvement 

(Musurmanova and Kirgizbayeva, 2019).  

-  Inversion  –  a  grammatical  technique  in  which  the  usual  word  order  is 

reversed in order to put emphasis on particular elements. Two main types 

of inversion are identified in the classification by Borysov and Vasylieva 

(2021):  complete  (when the predicate is displaced) and partial (when the 

secondary  members  of 

the  sentence  are  displaced).  In  political 

communication,  both  kinds  can  be  implemented  to  highlight  particular 

ideas  in  the  utterance  (e.g.,  “Tonight,  in  this  election, you, the American 

people,  reminded  us...”  –  the  case  of  a  partial  inversion  taken  from 

Barack  Obama’s  victory  speech).  In  this  example,  the  phrase  “you,  the 

American  people” is inserted for emotional emphasis, breaking the usual 

subject-verb-object order. 

-  Parcellation  –  a  construction  of  expressive  syntax  that  represents  the 

intentional  division  of  a  coherent  text  into  several  isolated  parts 

(segments),  separated  with  the  use  of  pauses  in  speeches  or punctuation 

 
48 

signs  in  texts  (e.g.,  “Thank  you.  Thank  you.  Thank  you  so  much.”  Each 

“Thank  you”  is  a  separate  sentence,  creating a parcellated effect – taken 

from  Barack  Obama’s  victory  speech).  Such  pauses  create  dramatic 

effect,  emphasise  key  points  and  make  the  speeches’  narrative  more 

sincere and emotional. 

-  Enumeration – a grammatical technique, in which several elements (not 

necessarily  homogeneous)  in  a  row  are listed to reinforce argumentation 

(e.g.,  “...  to  the  furniture  worker's  child  in North Carolina who wants to 

become  a  doctor  or  a  scientist,  an  engineer  or  an  entrepreneur,  a 

diplomat  or  even  a  president”  –  taken  from  Barack  Obama’s  victory 

speech).   The main function of enumeration in such cases is highlighting 

important  moments  in  the  speech  (the  given  example  illustrates  the 

emphasis  that  is  put  on  the  given  opportunities,  provided  by  the 

government towards various groups of people). 

-  Repetition – the repetition of the same word or phrase to add emphasis or 

emotional influence. It is crucial to point out that repetition is considered 

to be an expressive means language when it is used by the speaker under 

the stress of strong emotion (Skrebnev, 1994). In such cases, it shows the 

state  of  mind  of  the  speaker  that  is  always  conveyed  with  the  use  of 

intonation  and  is  therefore  an  expressive  unit  transmitted  through 

grammatical  and  phonetic  features.  However,  repetition  is  at  the  same 

time  a  stylistic  device  when  acquiring  different 

functions 

in 

communication, namely when it is not utilised primarily for an emotional 

impact (though it always has emotive connotations), but logical emphasis 

which sheds light on the major semantic parts of the utterance and draws 

attention of the listeners towards these parts.  

The examples provided for each of the techniques are based on the cultural and 

linguistic  analysis  of  the  pre-election  and  victory  speeches  of  Donald  John 

Trump,  Barack  Hussein  Obama,  and  George  Walker  Bush.  The  in-depth 

 
49 

examination  of  all  culturally-loaded  linguistic  features,  including  expressive 

means of language, stylistic devices and rhetorical strategies is presented in the 

practical part of the given research. 

Last  but  not  least,  the  phonetic  layer  is  to  be  discussed.  According  to 

Galperin  (1981)  and  his  fundamental  study  on  the  field  of  language  stylistics, 

phonetic  features  are  the  most  outstanding  and  powerful  expressive  means 

within any kinds of discourses. As it has been outlined earlier (see part 1.3), the 

linguistic  and  cultural  analysis  in  the  given  research  is  applied  to  both  verbal 

and  non-verbal  clues  in  order  to  provide  a  holistic  representation  of  the 

speaker’s  characteristics.  Thus,  at  this  level,  such  expressive  means  as  diverse 

intonation patterns, pitch, stress, pausation, manner of speech are also paid close 

attention to in the practical part of the study, as they all can be used in political 

discourse to enhance the speeches’ logical and emotional impacts. For example, 

the  analysis  of  Donald  Trump’s  pre-election  speech,  initially  presented  in  the 

video  format,  has  shown  the  extensive  use  of  regular,  exaggerated  pauses  and 

emphatic stress that in combination with thoroughly structured rhetoric create a 

stronger  and  more  powerful  emotional  effect  on  the  listener.  Some  scholars, 

including  Galperin  (1981)  and  Skrebnev  (1994),  even  claim  that  such 

peculiarities are more effective than any other means in terms of creating vivid, 

persuasive utterances.  

Having  explored  the  nature  and  particular  kinds  of  expressive  means  in 

political discourse, it is now essential to proceed to stylistic devices, which play 

a  paramount  role  in  shaping  the  rhetorical power of political utterances. While 

expressive  means  primarily  enhance  emotional  and  evaluative  coloring  of  the 

speech,  stylistic  devices  employ  figurative  and  structural  techniques  to  create 

and  reinforce  persuasion  impact  and  manipulate  the  audience’s  views.  The 

following  theoretical  overview  focuses  on  the  key  stylistic  devices  commonly 

used  by  politicians,  presenting  their  classifications  and  influence  on  political 

communication. 

 
50 

As  it  has  been already outlined, stylistic devices are linguistic tools with 

the  marked  rhetorical  and  figurative  meanings  that  politicians  use  to  create 

emotional  and  cognitive  effects,  making  their  messages  more  compelling  and 

memorable.  They  can  be  classified  into  several  major  types  (Lungu,  2020): 

figures  of  speech  (tropes),  syntactic  stylistic  features  (schemes),   phonetic and 

morphological  devices.  However,  the  stylistic  use  of  morphological  tools 

(namely,  morphological  repetitions)  are  not  examined in this study. It is due to 

the  fact  that  morphological  repetition  (successive  recurrence  of  the  same 

morpheme, e.g., suffixes or prefixes, within a sentence or a text) is considered to 

be  a  stylistic  device  only  when  it  is  used  deliberately  to  achieve  a  rhetorical 

effect and is hence more relevant in the analysis of the written texts. In political 

discourse and oral speeches in general, this is rather achieved by root repetition 

(described  later  in  the  chapter  as  a  type  of  syntactical  repetition)  or  lexical 

repetition  of  the  word  forms.  Thus,  morphological  repetition  in  the  context  of 

this  study  can  be  related  to  expressive  means  of  language  in  case  of  its 

occurrence, because it is most often utilised unintentionally within the speeches. 

In  the  context  of  political  discourse,  the  authors  (Lungu,  2020; 

Maqsudova,  2024;  Samatullaev  and  Fayziyeva,  2024;  et  al.)  

identify  the 

following  types  of  figures  of  speech  (tropes)  that  are  capable  of  constructing 

convincing and conceptual messages: 

-  Metaphor  –   a  speech  expression  based on comparison, transferring the 

meaning of a word to another object or phenomenon (Semino, 2008). 

According  to  the  author,  metaphors  are  used  in  discourse  to  convey  meaning 

through  comparison  (often  with  the  concept/object  that  is  more  familiar  and 

close  to  the  minds  of  the  audience),  to  frame  principles  and  ideas,  emphasise 

analogies or contrasts between two different objects or concepts. George Lakoff 

and  Mark  Johnson’s  (1992)  conceptual  metaphor  theory,  based  on  which 

metaphors  significantly  influence  communication,  behavior,  social  norms, 

decision making and relationship building, identifies such kinds as orientational, 

 
 
 
51 

ontological  and  structural  metaphors.  The  former  is  a  metaphor  that  includes 

spatial relationships (such as up/down, in/out, on/off,   front/back, etc.) to frame 

policies (e.g., ‘Progress is upward’ – Barack Obama’s victory speech). The next 

frequently  employed  type,  ontological  metaphor,  is  the  one  that  transfers 

something  concrete  or  complicated  into  something  abstract  or  easy  to 

comprehend  (e.g.,  ‘The  government  is  a  machine’  –  Donald  Trump’s 

pre-election  speech).  The  latter  kind,  on the contrary, is a metaphor in which a 

complex concept (typically abstract) is transferred into something concrete (e.g., 

‘Time is money’ – Donald Trump’s pre-election speech). While some metaphors 

are  universal  due  to  shared  human  experiences,  there  can  be  specific 

comparisons  that  are  rooted  in  the  unique  social  customs,  history,  values  or 

objects  of  a  particular  culture,  making  them  conceptual.  According  to  Hu 

(2024),  this  kind  of  metaphor  is  based  on  the  understanding  of  one  concept 

(domain  of  experience)  in  terms  of  another  (target  domain).  For  instance, 

Barack  Obama,  in  his  victory  speech,  employed  the  metaphor  – “…the task of 

perfecting our union moves forward” referring in the context of the utterance to 

American  people  as  a  “our  union  that  moves  forward”  to  symbolise  common 

national  unity  and  present  the  president  as  a  member  of  this  unity,  which 

connects  him  closer  with  the  audience.  In  addition,  this  example  also 

demonstrates the case of a personification in combination with the orientational 

type  of  metaphor  (“the  task  …  moves  forward”),  giving  an  abstract  political 

process a dynamic, almost physical quality. 

-  Personification  –  a  type  (variety)  of  metaphor  that  implies  portraying 

inanimate  objects  (concepts)  as  though  they  were capable of performing 

the  human  actions,  such as expressing thoughts and feelings, thinking or 

doing physical activities (Vestermark, 2007).  

In  her  study  on  metaphors in politics,   Vestermark states that personification is 

one  of  the  tools  that  are  used  alongside  with  other  kinds  of  metaphors  and 

rhetorical  devices 

to  manipulate  emotional  engagement, 

transforming 

 
52 

impersonal  concepts  into  relatable  narratives  (e.g.,  “The  spirit  that  has 

triumphed over war and depression” – Barack Obama’s victory speech). 

-  Simile  –   a  figure  of  speech  that  directly  compares  two  concepts  using 

such words as “like”, “as”, or “than” to emphasise a particular trait of one 

thing by associating it with another (Ofori et al., 2021).  

According  to  the  authors  of  the  study  dedicated  to  the  use  of  simile  and 

metaphor 

in  political  discourse,  both  devices  are 

implemented 

in 

communication  to  help  the  audience  visualise  and  understand  abstract  or 

complex  ideas  by  comparing  them  to  concrete,  relatable  objects  or  everyday 

experiences, therefore making a political leader seem closer to the people (e.g., 

“On the open plains of Texas, I first learned the character of our country: sturdy 

and  honest,  and  as  hopeful  as  the  break  of  day”  –  taken  from  George  Bush’s 

victory speech).  

-  Allusion – a figure of speech that contains a clear or hidden indication to 

a  literary,  historical,  mythological  or  political  fact,  a  famous  quotation, 

aphorism,  recorded  in  written  or  oral  speech  (Litvinov  and  V.  Ubiyko, 

2017). 

The  authors  identify  several  types  of  allusions,  including  cultural,  historical, 

biblical  and  mythological  references,  as  well  as  the  references  to  political 

slogans,  ideologies,  agendas,  quotes  of  famous  people,  customs,  traditions, 

masterpieces  of  art,  and  phenomena  of  mass  culture.  It  is  necessary  to  affirm 

that  all  types  of  allusion  are  highly  culturally-loaded,  as  they  always  rely  on 

shared knowledge without which the listeners could miss the intended meaning 

and  emotional  resonance.  Analysing  the  effects  of  linguistic  tools  on  the 

perception  of  political  speeches,  Bystrov  (2024)  confirms  that  by  referencing 

familiar  events  or  ideals,  allusions  inspire  pride,  hope  and  reinforce emotional 

appeal. Therefore, this trope is implemented very frequently in victory speeches 

in  particular  to  celebrate  ‘shared  achievement’  (e.g.,  “...more  than  200  years 

 
53 

after  a  former  colony  won  the  right  to  determine  its  own  destiny”  –  Barack 

Obama’s victory speech). 

-  Metonymy – a trope in which one word is replaced by another (usually a 

larger concept), based on their contiguity (Amanda, 2017). 

The  political  speakers  employ  metonymy  as  a  way  of  symbolic  and 

recogniseable  representation  of  complicated  political  realities,  systems  or 

institutions,  facilitating  quick  understanding and associations (e.g., “The White 

House announced” – Donald Trump’s pre-election speech, in which “The White 

House” refers to the whole presidential administration apparatus). 

-  Synecdoche  –  a  special  case  (variety)  of  metonymy  that  uses  a  part  to 

represent  the  whole,  simplifying  communication  and  making  messages 

more concrete and clear (Amanda, 2017).  

This device has a similar effect on the utterance, personalising broad categories 

by focusing on smaller, yet more relatable elements (e.g.,  “...the chance to cast 

their  ballots  like  we  did  today”  –   “ballots”  as  a  ‘part’  in  the  context  of  the 

Barack  Obama’s  victory  speech  stand  for  the  act  of  voting  or  ‘the  whole’ 

process). 

-  Antonomasia  –  another  case  (variety)  of  metonymy  that  consists  of 

replacing a title or name with an indication of some essential feature of an 

object  or  its  relationship  to  something else (Poghosyan and Gumashyan, 

2021). 

According  to  the  authors,  in  political  speeches  such  replacement  is most often 

achieved  using  epithets  or  descriptive  phrases  instead  of  proper  names.  Most 

importantly,  within  the  discourse,  these  descriptions  are  based  on  shared 

knowledge  about  the  person  or  object,  since  they  otherwise may lose meaning 

outside  the  cultural  context  or  require  explanation  (e.g.,   “America’s  happy 

warrior”  –  this  phrase  stands  for  a  description  of  Joe  Biden  as  “the  best 

vice-president” in the Barack Obama’s victory speech). 

 
54 

-  Epithet –  a qualitative adjective or descriptive phrase that characterises a 

person,  place,  or thing, often carrying figurative colouring and reflecting 

subjective perception or evaluative attitude (Monakhova, 2019).  

In  general,  epithets  are  mostly  universal  as  descriptive  adjectives  or  phrases, 

though  the  connotations  of  certain  epithets  can  vary  culturally.  Lungu  (2020) 

reports  that  this  device  adds  vividness,  intensifying  the  impressions  with 

emotive  language  and  guiding  audience  evaluation  by  emphasising  positive or 

negative  qualities,  therefore  framing  the  political  agendas  (e.g.,  “hard-fought 

campaign”,  “incredible work”, “strongest military” – Barack Obama’s victory 

speech) 

-  Hyperbole  –  a  trope  that  involves  an  exaggeration  used  for  emphasis, 

usually not intended to be taken literally but to stress the significance of a 

situation, element or characteristic (Monakhova, 2019).   

Lungu  (2020)  asserts  that  by  highlighting  the  successes,  political  actors 

convince  audiences  of  the  effectiveness  of  something,  often  motivating  public 

support  or  action  (“...  the  best  troops  this  world  has  ever  known”  –  Barack 

Obama’s  victory  speech).  In  addition,  even  though  the  majority  of  hyperboles 

are  universal  exaggerations,  there  are  cases  when  particular  set  expressions 

specific  to  a  particular  language,  country  or nation obtain similar meaning and 

become culture-specific (e.g., “Everything is gigantic in Texas” which is used to 

reflect  a  cultural  stereotype  and  pride  associated  with  Texas).  According  to 

Golubeva  (2019),  hyperbole  can  be  expressed  in  speech by a variety of forms, 

including  adjectives  (e.g.,  “extravagant  price”);  verbs  (e.g.,  “to  die  of 

curiosity”); pronouns, especially negative pronouns (e.g., nobody, nothing) and 

determiners (e.g., each, every, everybody, everything), which act as intensifiers; 

numerals  (e.g.,  “thousands  of”);  adverbs  of  frequency  (e.g.,  always,  never, 

ever),  manner  (e.g.,  inconceivably,  infinitely),  time  (e.g.,  at  any  time, 

whenever), place (e.g., anywhere, nowhere, everywhere); idiomatic expressions 

(e.g., “hit the ceiling”); and nouns (e.g., “giant”). As for litotes, which is a form 

 
55 

of understatement, it is rarely implemented in political discourse and are mainly 

employed  in  debates  or  interviews  by  the  speakers  to  subtly  downplay  the 

policies of the opponent parties and candidates, or as a form of sarcasm (Salih & 

Braim, 2014).  

-  Irony  –  a  rhetorical  device  in  which  the  intended  meaning  differs  from 

the 

literal  meaning  or  when  expectations  and 

reality  diverge 

(Gornostayeva,  2016).  According  to  Musolff  (2017),  irony  is  a  relevant  

tool presented in the modern political discourse, often used as a strategic 

strategy  aimed  at delivering complex messages indirectly and making an 

emotional  appeal.  It  is  crucial to mention that politicians often use irony 

to  ridicule  opponents  or  policies  without overtly attacking them (usually 

in  parties’  debates  and  interviews  capturing  political  representatives). 

Moreover,  irony  can  be  used  to  build  emotional  connection  with  the 

audience  and  reduce  tension.  It  is  important  to  differentiate  the  terms 

‘humour’  and  ‘irony’,  since  humour  itself  is  not typically classified as a 

single stylistic device but rather as a broader communicative strategy that 

can  be  achieved through various stylistic devices, including irony, satire, 

parody, hyperbole, and others.  For instance, in his victory speech, Barack 

Obama  produced  a  humorous  effect  using  irony  when  referring  to  his 

daughters  and  their  desire to have dogs “And I am so proud of you guys. 

But  I  will  say  that,  for  now,  one  dog's  probably  enough  (laughter, 

applause).” 

It  is  essential  to  mention  that  the  above  mentioned  overview  of  lexical 

stylistic  devices  concentrates  mainly  on  those figures of speech that have been 

identified  as  the  most  frequent  and  efficient  ones  in  the  context  of  political 

discourse.  Moreover,  the  presented  units  have  exceptional  persuasive  and 

emotional  power,  which  is  of  paramount  importance  to  be  taken  into  account 

when examining the presidential speeches with the use of cultural and linguistic 

approach to acquire a full and representative analysis.  

 
 
56 

Further,  it  is  equally  important  to  explore  syntactic  stylistic  features, 

which contribute significantly to the structure and persuasive power of political 

communication.  In  contrast  with  lexical  devices  that  enrich  political  language 

with  vivid  meanings,  grammatical  peculiarities  focus  on  how  the  speeches are 

organised  independently  of  the  lexical  meanings  of  the  utilised  components, 

hence  influencing  the  logical  effectiveness  of  the messages transmitted. Zhang 

et  al.  (2017)  outline  a  rhetorical  question  as  one  of  the  most  prominent 

syntactic devices. The authors define it as a statement presented in the form of a 

question  not  to  obtain  an  answer  but  to  emphasise  a  point,  gain  a  particular 

effect  or  engage  the  audience  (e.g.,  “Look  what  happened,  is  this  crazy?”  – 

taken  from  Donald  Trump’s  victory  speech).  The  majority  of  other  syntactic 

stylistic  devices  represent  diverse  types  of  grammatical  repetition  that  are 

crucial to be outlined in this chapter since many scholars (Khdair, 2016; Sallomi 

&  Chiad,  2019;  Shah  and  Ahmad,  2020;  et  al.)  confirm  that  they  are  very 

frequently  employed  in  the  domain  of  political  speeches  to  intensify  the 

manipulative aspect of communication, as well as to make the storytelling more 

structured and logical. Kemertelidze and Manjavidze (2013) define and describe 

such types of syntactic repetition as:  

-  Anaphora (anaphoric repetition) – repetition of a word or phrase at the 

beginning of two or more successive sentences (e.g., “Whether you voted 

for the very first time … Whether you pounded the pavement or picked up 

the  phone.   Whether  you  held  an  Obama  sign  or  a  Romney  sign  …”  – 

taken from Barack Obama’s victory speech)  

-  Epiphora  (epiphoric  repetition)  –  repetition  of  a word or phrase at the 

end of two or more successive sentences (“This country has more wealth 

than  any  nation,  but  that's  not  what  makes  us  rich.  We  have  the  most 

powerful military in history, but that's not what makes us strong”  – taken 

from Barack Obama’s victory speech). 

 
57 

-  Anadiplosis – repetition of the last word or phrase of the sentence at the 

beginning of the next one (e.g., “... the task of perfecting our union moves 

forward.   Moves forward because of you.” –  taken from Barack Obama’s 

victory speech). Chain repetition, a subtype of anadiplosis, that is used for 

a  smooth  development  of  logical  and/or  emotional reasoning may rarely 

be  met  in  political  discourse,  usually  in  the  form  of  repetition  of 

collocations  where  one  element  stays  unchanged,  and the other replaced 

with  another  word  for  a  further  development  of the idea (“And when we 

go  through  tough  times,  when  we  make  big  decisions  as  a  country,  it 

necessarily  stirs  passions,  stirs  up  controversy.”  –  taken  from  Barack 

Obama’s victory speech) 

-  Framing  –  repetition  of  a word or phrase at the beginning of a sentence 

or  paragraph  and  at  the  end  of  this  syntactic  unit  to  ‘frame’  the  idea 

(“That's   what  we  want  –  that's  the  future  we  hope for. That's the vision 

we share. That's where we need to go – forward. That's where we need to 

go. That’s what we want.” – taken from Barack Obama’s victory speech). 

This kind of repetition is used to frame any part of the speech – sentence, 

paragraph or the whole utterance. For example, when the same statement 

is said at the start and the end for emotional impact. 

-  Root repetition – repetition of the words that have one root but differ in 

their prefixes, suffixes or grammatical form. Root repetition amplifies the 

emotional  resonance  by  augmenting  the  symbolic  significance  of  the 

stressed (key) words of the statement (e.g., “I've never been more hopeful 

about  our  future.  I  have  never  been  more  hopeful  about  America. And I 

ask  you  to  sustain  that  hope.”  –  taken  from  Barack  Obama’s  victory 

speech).   

-  Antithesis  –  a  stylistic  device  that  involves  posing  two  contrasting  or 

opposing  concepts,  usually  within  parallel  grammatical  constructions 

(Gimranova  et  al.,  2019).   According  to  the  authors,  this  syntactic 

 
58 

technique  can  be  manifested  in  the  form  of  two  words or two groups of 

words  that  are  contrasted  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening  the statement 

by  emphasising  positive and negative options and leading audiences to a 

preferred  conclusion.  Analysing  the  functions  of  antithesis  in  political 

discourse, Gimranova et al. (2019) highlights that there are diverse forms 

of  opposition  (i.e.  ‘friend-or-foe’,  “correct  and  incorrect’,  ‘right  and 

wrong’,  and  others)  that  are  implemented  intentionally  to  frame  issues, 

manipulate,  and  persuade  the  audience  (e.g.,  “Here  buildings  fell,  and 

here a nation rose.”  – taken from George Bush’s pre-election speech) 

-  Parallelism  (parallel  constructions)  –  stylistic  repetition  of  similar 

grammatical structures (words, phrases, clauses) to create rhythm, clarity, 

and  emphasis  (e.g.,  “We  will  continue  our  economic  progress.  We'll 

reform our outdated tax code. We'll strengthen Social Security for the next 

generation.  We'll make public schools all they can be…” – the repetition 

of  the  same  structure  ‘We  will  +  verb  +  object  -  phrase,  taken  from 

George  Bush’s  victory  speech).  According  to  Al-Ameedi  &  Mukhef 

(2017),  a  successive  repetition  of  the  clauses  in  political  speeches  is 

utilised to persuade and manipulate the listeners for particular aims of the 

campaign, agenda or policy.  

-  Chiasmus  (reversed  parallelism)  –  rhetorical  device  in  which  the 

grammatical structures of clauses or phrases are mirrored in reverse order 

(e.g.,  “America's  never  been  about  what  can  be  done  for  us;  it's  about 

what  can  be  done by us together.” – the reversal here emphasises call to 

action  over  passive  reception,  taken  from  Barack  Obama’s  victory 

speech).  Chiasmus  is a technique that is utilised rarer than parallelism in 

political  discourse,  however, 

it  still  has  significant 

impacts  on 

communication,  including  the  emphasis  on  relationships  or  contrast 

between  two  ideas,  and  the  creation  of  thought-provoking  effect  on  a 

listener (Al-Ameedi & Mukhef, 2017).  

 
59 

-  Polysyndeton  –  the  deliberate  use  of  repeated  conjunctions  in  close 

succession  (usually  between  several  clauses  or  within  one  extended 

clause).  Babayev  (2024)  states  that  this  device  serves  a  variety  of 

functions,  comprising  the  creation  of  emotionally  -  coloured  effect  or 

force,  drawing  attention  to  each  item  in  a  list  and  showing  the  scale  of 

importance  of  what  is  being  enumerated  (e.g.,  “…many Americans have 

fought  for  and  died  for  come  with  responsibilities  as  well as rights, and 

among  those  are love and charity and duty and patriotism”). In addition 

to that, polysyndeton influences the non-verbal aspect of communication, 

namely  the  pace  of  the  speech,  allowing  the  audience  to  carefully  think 

about and concentrate on each of the elements (Babayev, 2024).  

-  Asyndeton  –  a  kind  of  syntactical  connection  with  the  omission  of 

conjunctions between elements (parts) of a sentence (e.g., “We have taken 

back control of the Senate. The Senate races in Montana, Nevada, Texas, 

Ohio,  Michigan,  Wisconsin  ...  were  all won by the MAGA movement.” – 

taken  from  Donald  Trump’s  victory  speech).  Babayev  (2024)  elaborates 

on  the  peculiar  use  of  asyndeton  in  political  speeches  as  well,  claiming 

that  this  technique  is  employed  for  different  purposes, among which the 

most  relevant  in  the  context of political discourse are the acceleration of 

rhythm  and  pace  of  the  speech,  conveying  excitement  and  urgency  and 

the  elimination  of unnecessary words, sharpening the focus on the major 

points and making the message more direct. 

The  discussion  of  syntactical  repetition  provides  a  foundation  for 

understanding  how  repetition  shapes  narrative  techniques  within  political 

discourse.  Building  on  this,  the  next  part  of  the  chapter  focuses  on  phonetic 

repetition, which represent a distinct category of stylistic devices with their own 

characteristic features and expressive potential.  

As  Kemertelidze  and  Manjavidze  (2013)  explain  that  repetition  can  be 

manifested not only in the forms of words, phrases and clauses, but also sounds. 

 
60 

In  such  cases,  repetition  belongs  to  the  category  of  phonetic  stylistic  devices 

that comprise two main types – alliteration and assonance. Despite the fact that 

some  authors  (Harris,  2017;  Nizomova,  2021;  et  al.)  associate  these  two  tools 

with  the  literary  techniques  used  primarily  in  poetry  or  other  writings,  the 

studies  that  focus  on  Political  Discourse  Theory  by  Dellagnelo  et  al.  (2014) 

confirm  that alliteration and assonance are not limited to written texts, they are 

useful  tools  in  oral  delivery,  especially  in  those  types  of  speeches,  where 

memorability and emotional resonance are crucial.  

Alliteration,  according  to  Nizomova  (2021),  is  a  repetition  of  the  same 

consonant  sounds  in  a  sequence  of  words  or  syllables  (e.g.,  “We  are  not  a 

collection of red states and blue states; we are the United States of America” – 

repetition of ‘s’ and ‘t’ sounds, taken from Barack Obama’s victory speech). In 

political  discourse,  the  cases  of  phonetic  techniques  implemented  in  speeches 

are mild and not very frequent, but in combination with other linguistic devices 

they  fulfill their functions, adding musicality and rhythm, making the utterance 

more memorable.  

Assonance,  in  contrast,  is  a  repetition  of  the  same  vowel  sounds within 

nearby words, especially in stressed syllables (Nizomova, 2021). This technique 

can  be  noticed  in  the  identical  grammatical  structures  (parallel  constructions), 

accompanied  with  the repetition of the same sounds (e.g., “I want to thank you 

for your hugs on the rope lines. I want to thank you for your prayers on the rope 

lines.  I  want to thank you for your kind words on the rope lines.” – taken from 

Barack Obama’s victory speech).  

To  summarise  the  overview  of  expressive  means and stylistic devices, it 

is  important  to  highlight  that  they  all  are  essential  attributes  of  political 

discourse, serving multiple communicative and pragmatic functions. First of all, 

both categories of features are employed for persuasive and emotional impacts, 

enhancing the speaker’s ability to convince the audience by appealing to reason 

and  common  values   (Lungu,  2020).  For  instance,  metaphors  and metonymies 

 
 
61 

frame  complex  political  and  cultural  realities  in  accessible  terms,  focusing 

attention  on  selected  aspects  and  obscuring  others.  Second  of  all,  the  use  of 

culturally  -  loaded  language  (e.g.,  allusions,  phraseological  units,  metaphors, 

etc.)  helps  evoke  the  feeling  of  the  state’s  or  presidency’s  proximity  to  the 

people  (Liu  &  Guo,  2016).  This  is  equal  to  manipulation  of  public  opinion 

which  helps  to  improve  the  speaker’s  credibility  and  authority.   Third  of  all, 

memorability,  rhythm,  and  emotional  density  are  intensified  with  the  use  of 

various  stylistic  devices,  such  as  repetition  or  parallelism,  and  expressive 

means,  including  ellipsis  or  inversion,  which  make  speeches  memorable  and 

more  structured  and  logical  (Kuriata & Kasatkina-Kubyshkina, 2022). Overall, 

through  the  use  of  such  tools  political  speakers  construct  identities  and 

ideological  policies  that  are  aimed  at  particular  social  groups  and  are  thus 

subjects of cultural and linguistic analysis.  

Rhetorical  strategies  are  another  crucial  and  effective  techniques  in 

political  communication.  Their  implementation  helps  political  figures  deliver 

compelling  narratives  and  create  a  credible  image  that  makes  audiences  feel 

confident  in  what  they  are  listening  to  (Khajavi  and  Rasti,  2020).  These 

classical  rhetorical  appeals,  originally  identified  by  Aristotle,  continue  to 

influence  the  ways  of  how  politicians  construct  arguments,  engage  audiences, 

and  impact  public  opinion  (Raissouni,  2020).  When  it  comes  to  the  language 

functions  that  should  be  taken  into  account  in  political  discourse,  Khajavi and 

Rasti  (2020)  indicate  that  presidential  candidates  are  expected  to  speak 

persuasively  about  their  proposals  and  ideological  perspectives  in  order  to 

defeat  their  political  rivals and gain the highest number of votes. This explains 

why politicians in general utilize persuasive rhetoric so frequently. 

In  accordance  with  Raissouni’s  work  (2020),  ethos  refers  to  the 

credibility or ethical appeal of the speaker. It focuses on the trustworthiness and 

authority  of  the  politician  delivering  the  message. Ethos is established through 

the  speaker’s reputation, tone, demonstration of knowledge, and surely through 

 
 
 
62 

the  use  of  language,  which  collectively  build  the  audience’s  confidence  in  the 

speaker’s  reliability.  For  example,  politicians  often  use  a  personal  pronoun 

(“we”)  to  create  a  sense  of  connection  and  responsibility,  thereby  enhancing 

their ethos.  

The second strategy, pathos, is an emotional appeal aimed at influencing 

the  audience’s  feelings  and  beliefs  (Raissouni,  2020).  It  is  most  often  used 

intentionally to trigger the listeners’ empathy, pride, hope and other emotions to 

motivate  action  or  agreement.  In  political  discourse,  pathos  is  also  achieved 

through  the  combination  of  verbal  (expressive  means,  stylistic  devices  and 

emotive  language  primarily)  and  non-verbal  features.  As  an  example,  in  his 

victory  speech  from  the second term, Barack Obama employed a great number 

of  personal  examples  and  stories  which  served  as  powerful  tools  of  evoking 

emotions beneficial for fostering intimacy with the public.  

Moving  to  the  next  technique,  logos  refers  to  the  logical  appeal  or 

reasoning  in  the  utterance  (Raissouni,  2020).  It  involves  the  use  of  facts, 

statistics,  evidence  and  clear,  coherent  argumentation  to persuade the audience 

through  rationality  (e.g.,  “We  are  now  winning  in  Michigan,  Arizona,  Nevada 

and Alaska, which would result in us carrying at least three-hundred-and-fifteen 

electoral  votes.”  –  clear  facts  and  statistics,  provided  by  Donald  Trump  in  his 

victory  speech).  In  political speeches, logical appeals are implemented through 

the  use  of  syntactical  stylistic  devices,  since  the  construction  of  a  logical  and 

structured  narrative  is  one  of their main functions, and other figures of speech, 

such  as  allusions  that  can  make  strong  references  to  historical  and  cultural 

events  (e.g.,  “In  four  historic  years,  America  has  been  given  great  tasks  and 

faced  them  with  strength  and  courage”  –  allusion  to  past  achievements  in 

George Bush’s victory speech).  

Last  but  not  least,  there  is  the  fourth  rhetorical  strategy, also outlined in 

Aristotle’s  rhetoric  theory  and  recognised  as  a  separate  technique  that  has  a 

valuable  impact  especially  in  the  sphere  of  public  discourses,  which  is  called 

 
63 

kairos. It is an ‘opportune’ moment which implies choosing a correct rhetorical 

device  to match the communicative goal of the utterance and correspond to the 

appropriateness  of  the  arguments  within  ongoing  circumstances  and  a  broader 

political  or  social  environment  (Mohamad  et  al.,  2022).  Within  the  context  of 

political speeches, kairos is most frequently employed for the purpose of call to 

action function or to align the message with the audience’s concerns and current 

political  climate  (e.g.,  “And  I  ask  you  to  sustain  that  hope”  referring  to  the 

request to sustain hope beyond election in Barack Obama’s victory speech). 

Finally,  this chapter is to discuss non-verbal features of communication 

that are also examined in this study, as they are crucial elements accompanying 

the  whole  utterance  and  verbal  peculiarities presented in it, the combination of 

which allows to obtain a comprehensive analysis of all peculiarities presented in 

political communication. Non-verbal communication is generally defined as the 

process  of  transmission  of  messages  without  words,  involving  both  vocal  and 

nonvocal  cues  (Hasanova,  2019).  Vocal  nonverbal  elements,  known  as 

paralanguage,  include  tone,  pitch,  volume,  rate  of  speech,  and  other  voice 

qualities  that  add  emotional   emphasis  to  spoken  words.  As  it  has  been  stated 

earlier,   these non-verbal elements can be considered expressive means, as they 

convey  emotionality  and  highlight  certain  elements  of  the  speech.   Nonvocal 

elements,  according  to  Hasanova  (2019),  include  body  language  –  gestures, 

facial  expressions,  posture,  eye contact, and the use of personal space that also 

complement  the  utterance,  reinforcing  or  sometimes  contradicting  verbal 

communication.  

What  is  more,  it  is  necessary  to  denote  that  different  cultures  interpret 

non-verbal  signals  differently   (Zyubina,  2023).  Non-verbal  behaviors  such  as 

tone  of  voice  and  facial  expressions can amplify emotional appeals in political 

speeches. Particular studies show that voters often rely more on non-verbal cues 

than  verbal  content  when  assessing  candidates  since  they  create  an  overall 

picture  of  the  speaker.  However,  it  is  also  crucial  to  note  that  nonverbal 

 
64 

behavior  can  reflect  cultural  biases  that  influence  public  attitudes  toward 

different  social  categories.  For  instance,  Zyubina  (2023)  indicates  that  certain 

groups  may  elicit  more  positive  or  negative  nonverbal  responses  based  on 

societal norms regarding race, gender or body type.  

In  conclusion,  the  provided  theoretical  base  that  outlines  the  features  of 

linguistic and cultural approach to the analysis of political discourse represents a 

comprehensive  overview  of  the  devices  that  have  strong  emotional  and 

persuasive power and are hence essential to be examined in detail to acquire an 

in-depth  understanding  of  cultural  and  linguistic  constituents  inherent  in  a 

speaker.  It  has  been  found  out that politicians use a variety of linguistic means 

to  persuade  the  audience,  resonate with cultural norms, thoughts and beliefs of 

the  audience.  By  decoding  the  emotional  density  and  cultural  connotations, 

ingrained  in  political  speeches,  this study aims to reveal how exactly linguistic 

choices  align  with  or  challenge  dominant  cultural  narratives,  thereby  shaping 

public  opinion  and  legitimising  leadership.  All  presented  culturally-loaded 

linguistic  tools  are  analysed  through  the  prism  of  victory  and  pre-election 

political  speeches  of George Walker Bush, Barack Hussein Obama and Donald 

John  Trump  using  linguistic and cultural framework in the practical part of the 

study. 

Practical Part 

2.1 Research Design  

The  overall effectiveness of the analysis performed and the clarity of the 

results  obtained  depend  not  only  on  the  correct  establishment  of  the  research 

methods  but  also  on  the  use  of  relevant  procedures  that  minimise  errors  and 

enhance  the  validity  and  reliability of the findings   (Nascimento & Steinbruch, 

2019).  This  is  especially  important  in  studies  that  involve  complex  and 

multifaceted  materials,  where  subtle  linguistic  and  cultural  elements  must  be 

 
65 

carefully  examined.  Based  on  that,  this  chapter  is  dedicated  to  revealing  the 

selected  research  design,  methods  and  analytical  procedures  within  the 

framework  of  cultural  and  linguistic  approach.  Additionally,  it  is  crucial  to 

emphasise that the units of analysis in this study are political speeches, a factor 

that  significantly 

influences 

the  choice  and  application  of  particular 

methodological strategies.  

To  begin  with,  this  study  employs  a  mixed  research  design,  integrating 

both  qualitative  and  quantitative  methods  to  conduct  a  linguistic  and  cultural 

analysis  of  political  discourse,  specifically  focusing  on  the  victory  and 

pre-election  speeches  of  Donald  John  Trump,  Barack  Hussein  Obama,  and 

George  Walker  Bush  during 

their  second  presidential 

terms.  Before 

substantiating  the  practical  significance  of  using their synthesis, it is necessary 

to consider each research design separately.  

Starting  with  a  qualitative  approach,  Cropley  (2021)  argues  that  this 

method  is  based  on  the  study  of  how  people  build  on  and  use  their  life 

experiences to form ideas and messages. Additionally, qualitative methods focus 

on  the  subjective  meanings  and  interpretations  people  assign  to  events, 

messages,  or  phenomena.  The  received  narrative  is  further  analysed  from  the 

point  of  view  of  behavioral  sciences,  and  decoded  in  accordance  with  the 

provided  context,  allowing  to  decode  the  underlying  intentions  and  cultural 

nuances  inherent  in  the  discourse.  Abuhamda  et  al.  (2021)  highlight  that 

qualitative  research  is  also  implemented  in  order  to  identify  a  certain  logical 

connection  or  pattern  in  the  ideas  and opinions expressed by people on certain 

topics.  One  of  the  key  purposes  of  this  research  design  is  to  identify  the 

linguistic motives and reasons for using a particular way of expressing an idea. 

Therefore,  its  main  units  of  research  are  such  data  sources  as  interviews, 

speeches, open-ended questions in surveys or questionnaires, and text materials 

(e.g., transcribed oral utterances and documents). 

 
 
66 

On  the  contrary,  the  quantitative  research  design  focuses  on  the 

systematic  collection  and  analysis  of  numerical  data  derived  from  measurable 

phenomena  (Cropley,  2021).  This  approach  is  used  to  represent  a  number  of 

items  presented  in  a  dataset  for  their  further  analysis  and  comparison. 

Implementation  of  quantitative  methods  makes  it  possible  to  obtain  the  most 

reliable,  visualised  and  clear  measurable  results  that  can  be  statistically 

validated  without  requiring  extensive  subjective  interpretation.  According  to 

Abuhamda  et  al.  (2021),  once  numerical  data  are  gathered,  they  are  organised 

into  tables,  graphs,  or  other  visual  formats  to  facilitate  statistical  examination 

that  allows  analysing  particular  changes  or  existing  trends,  as   well  as  to 

establish  credible  results  in  accordance  with  them.  Consequently,  the  primary 

data  sources  within  this  research  method  are  quantitative  surveys  with 

closed-ended questions, and numerical tables or graphs. 

Having  an  overall  understanding  of each research design separately, it is 

possible  to  consider  the  relevance  of their synthesis in the context of linguistic 

and cultural approach implemented in this study. Firstly, the use of a qualitative 

approach is determined by the fact that the chosen research units for analysis are 

political  speeches  and  the  language  used  in  them  as  a  reflection  of  cultural 

heritage  and  background.  Accordingly, 

it 

implies 

the  study  of 

the 

interconnection  not  only  between  culture  and  language,  but  also  cognitive 

processes  (mindsets  of  the  speakers).  Secondly,  to  accurately  identify  and 

compare  the  frequency  and  distribution  of  specific  linguistic  structures  (e.g., 

expressive  means  of  language,  figures  of  speech,  rhetorical  appeals,  etc.)  and 

techniques  (syntactical  devices,  narrative  constructions,   storytelling strategies, 

etc.)  used  by  different  political  leaders  across  various  speech  types,  it  is 

necessary to quantify and visualise these features using graphs and tables. In the 

framework  of  linguistic  and  cultural  analysis,  this quantification is particularly 

useful,  since  it  helps  to  provide  objective  and  representative  numerical 

indicators that can be carefully examined in terms of their functions and impacts 

 
 
 
67 

on the effectiveness of communication. Thirdly, the synthesis of two contrasting 

research  designs  makes  it  possible  to  conduct  a  thorough  analysis  and  obtain 

comprehensive  results  aimed  at  addressing  the  existing  research  gap  by 

examining  and  identifying  the  full  range  of  linguistic  features  that  convey 

specific  cultural  connotations  in  the  selected  political  speeches,  thereby 

providing  a  holistic  understanding  of the distinctive language characteristics in 

political  discourse.   To  achieve  the  primary  goal  and  answer  the  research 

questions of the study, regarding which culturally-loaded linguistic elements are 

employed in political discourse and the key functions they fulfill, the following 

analytical methods are to be utilised: 

-  Critical Discourse analysis;  

-  Content analysis; 

-  Comparative analysis. 

First,  the  essence  of  critical  discourse  analysis  is  to  be  examined, 

outlining  its  implications  for  the  given  research.  Critical  Discourse  Analysis 

(CDA)  is  a  qualitative  analytical  approach  that  is  aimed  at  revealing  and 

analysing  the  language,  ideology  and  power (Sharififar & Rahimi, 2015). That 

means  that  CDA  is  a  method  that  is  used  to  uncover the ways speakers utilise 

language  to  frame  ideologies,  power  relations and dominance in the social and 

political  contexts.  This  analytical  method  is  especially  useful  for  political 

speeches,  as  it  reveals  how  politicians  construct  social  realities,  confirm  their 

authority,  and  influence  public  opinion  through  language  (Fairclough  & 

Fairclough,  2012).  From  this  perspective,  this  approach  relates  to  the  study  of 

discourse  events  and  discourse  practice,  which  includes  the  production, 

distribution,  and  consumption  of  texts  or  speeches  by  the  audience.  Norman 

Fairclough's core works on the application of CDA to text analysis influenced a 

further  development  of  the  theory that implies that the language used in public 

domains (political addresses, media communication, advertisement, etc.) always 

integrates hidden expressions of power and dominance. Furthermore, according 

 
68 

to  these  works,  application  of  CDA  in  political discourse analysis includes the 

examination of social, political and cultural backgrounds of the speakers that are 

essential  to  be  taken  into  account  when  explaining  their  linguistic choices and 

the  contexts  behind  them.   In  this  regard,  Fairclough’s  approach  is  highly 

intertwined with the linguistic and cultural analytical method and complement it 

by  fulfilling  the  function  of  decoding  the  subtle  linguistic  strategies  through 

which  cultural  values  and  political  ideologies  are  transmitted  in  the  selected 

presidential  speeches,  relying  on  the  thorough  study  of  the  presidents’ 

backgrounds.  In  addition,  it  is  used  to  identify  other  functions  of  the  found 

techniques,  influencing  the  perception  of  the  overall  message  including 

persuasion and intensification of the emotional impact of the utterances. 

Next,  after  the  identification  of  the  linguistic  units  that  have  certain 

cultural connotations and emotive power, content analysis is to be applied. It is 

a systematic quantitative and qualitative method used to identify, categorise, and 

quantify  specific  elements  within  texts  (Talhadas  et  al.,  2016).  This  technique 

involves  transferring  textual  data  into  predefined  categories  to  detect  patterns, 

frequencies,  and  thematic  trends,   providing  empirical  evidence  to  support 

qualitative  data.  Therefore,  content  analysis  is  employed  in  this  research  in 

order to carry out the analysis and measurement of the linguo-cultural content of 

the  speeches,  which  is  manifested  in  how  often  particular  manipulative 

linguistic  devices,  socio-cultural  contexts,  or  cultural  references  appear  in 

speeches. It is a crucial step of the practical analysis, without which it would not 

be  possible  to  acquire  representative  visualisations  (in  the  form  of  tables  and 

graphs),  which  facilitate  the  comparison  of  linguistic  peculiarities  across 

different  political  leaders  and  types  of  speeches.  Hence,  content  analysis 

supports the mixed-methods design of this study by offering objective data that 

complement the results gained based on CDA. 

Finally, comparative analysis that is to be conducted using the tools of the 

above  mentioned  analytical  methods  is  to  be  discussed.  It  is  a  method  that  is 

 
 
 
69 

implemented  in  order  to  compare  and  contrast  different  analysed  units  within 

each  subgroup,  according  to  the  selected  criteria and parameters   (Bolbakov et 

al.,  2020).  Within  the  framework  of  political  discourse,  this  method  gives  an 

opportunity to compare speeches by different political figures or across different 

time  periods,  thereby  identifying  diverse  or  shared  linguistic  patterns.  In  the 

context  of  this  paper,  the  comparison  is  to  be  made  upon  the  following 

parameters:  

1.  Each  speaker’s  linguistic  choices,  influenced  by  a  unique  cultural 

background.  This  criterion  for  comparison 

is  essential  for 

the 

accomplishment  of  the  main  goals  of  the study. It is due to the fact that, 

based  on  the  principles  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach,  the  social, 

political,  and  cultural background of the speaker defines and impacts the 

way a person utilises language as a tool of persuasion, manipulation, and 

emotional influence. Thus, it is methodologically grained that each of the 

presidents  have  their  own  unique  socio-cultural  backgrounds  that  have 

influenced  their  mindsets,  as  well  as  the  language  and  rhetoric  they 

utilise.  This  contrast  allows  the  given  research  to  identify  how  the 

differences acquired through personal experiences impact lexical choices, 

narrative techniques and persuasive appeals.  

2.  Communicative situation and goal of the utterance. The importance of 

this  criterion  lies  in  the  fact  that  the selected units for analysis represent 

two different communicative situations, in particular, victory and election 

speeches.  These  two  types  of  presidential  addresses  have  their  own 

distinctive  features  and  communicative  goals  that  in  many  ways  define 

the choice of linguistic tools and rhetorical strategies employed. Thus, the 

practical  part  of  the  study  aims  to  characterise  the  differences  and 

similarities of the devices employed within two various kinds of speeches 

to  identify  whether  culturally-specific  units  vary  depending  on  the 

communicative  goal,  as  well  as  to  understand  what  cultural  values, 

 
70 

societal  attitudes,  political  and  economic  issues  are  transmitted  within 

each of them.  

Overall,  the  comparative  method  with  the  parameters  identified  is  an 

indispensable tool of this study’s analysis. Its importance lies in the fact that the 

linguistic and cultural paradigm, through which the speeches are examined, puts 

forward  a  fundamental  theory  that  discourse  cannot  be  separated  from  the 

speaker’s  socio-cultural  peculiarities,  making  it  important  to  contrast  the 

speeches of three influential political discourse within the research that captures 

not only one but several representatives of diverse backgrounds. 

As  for  the  data  preparation  procedures  used in the research, they mainly 

involve  the  selection  of  the  speeches  (which  is  described  in-detail  in  part  2.2) 

and  the  transcription  process.  The  latter  is  required  as  the  primary  data 

consisting  of  video  recordings  of  the  presidents’  victory  and  pre-election 

speeches  needs  to  be  transferred  to  a  textual  format.  This  process  follows  a 

standard 

transcription  approach.  It 

is 

important 

to  point  out 

that  a 

full-encompassing 

representation  of  non-verbal 

features 

requires 

the 

implementation  of  a  different  approach  to  transcribing  speeches,  namely, 

prosodic transcription type that is oriented particularly to the thorough study of 

phonological aspects of communication. However, due to the fact that this study 

focuses  and  puts  the  major  emphasis  on  the  use  of  culturally-loaded linguistic 

items, the practical analysis in conducted taking into account the peculiarities of 

intonation and pausing patterns only where relevant to outline the emotional and 

manipulative power of the messages conveyed by the combination of verbal and 

non-verbal  cues  (e.g.,  in  such  cases,  when  the  particular  lexical  or  syntax 

devices  are  used  with  explicit  intonation without which they would not impact 

the  perception  that  much).  A  more  full-fledged  analysis  of  the  influence  of 

phonological  devices  on  persuasiveness  of  political  communication  is  to  be 

carried out as part of further research.  

 
71 

Last  but  not  least,  this  part  outlines  the  analytical  procedures  that  are 

employed.   In  this  research,  a  combination  of  qualitative  and  quantitative 

analytical procedures is implemented to ensure a comprehensive examination of 

political  speeches  within  the  linguistic  and  cultural  framework.  Firstly, 

qualitative  procedures  primarily  imply  the  use  of  Critical  Discourse  Analysis 

that comprises a detailed, context-sensitive examination of the speeches aiming 

to  find  the  techniques  (stylistic  devices,  expressive  means,  cultural  references, 

etc.) to reveal hidden meanings, ideological positions, and cultural implications 

transmitted  through  language.  This  step  includes  close  reading  of  the  texts  to 

identify  key  themes,  rhetorical  strategies,  and  narrative  structures.  Secondly, 

qualitative  content  analysis  is  used  to  classify  the  types  and  relationships 

between  the  identified  elements,  focusing  on  how  various  kinds  of  one device 

influence the discourse in certain ways.  

In parallel, quantitative procedures are utilised to make the tables with the 

categories  of  devices  found,  their  types,  number  of  occurrences  and  examples 

(see Appendix). After that, graphical visualisations in the form of pie charts are 

to be constructed in order to accurately depict the frequency and distribution of 

the  specific  linguistic  and  rhetorical  features  (e.g.,  metaphors,  allusions, 

syntactic constructions) across the speeches. Finally, a qualitative comparison of 

the  features  is  to  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  the  visualised  representative 

components and parameters outlined earlier in this section.  

To  sum  up,  the  integration of the mixed research design with the chosen 

methods  and  identified  analytical  procedures  guarantees  the  reliability  and 

effectiveness  of  the  results  obtained  based  on  the  practical  analysis.  It  is  also 

important  to  state  that the choice of the methods is closely interconnected with 

the  needs  and  principles  of  the  linguistic  and  cultural  approach,  which  

complement and not contradict each other. 

 
 
72 

2.2 Sampling 

Having  created  a  comprehensive  theoretical  base  and  identified  the 

methods  of  analysis  that  are  to  be  used  in  order  to  study  the  units  of  political 

discourse,  it  becomes  possible  to  proceed  to  the  establishment  and description 

of sampling methods. 

To begin with, it is necessary to identify that in order to obtain the most 

representative  base  for  the  analysis,  in  this  paper,  the  types  of  speeches  to  be 

studied  and  the  political  figures  who  delivered  them  have  the  same  sampling 

method,  but  different  criteria.  The  stratified  sampling  is  implemented. 

According  to  Jain  &  Shukla  (2025),  the  use  of  this  particular  approach  is 

traditionally  determined by the necessity to improve the accuracy of evaluating 

sample units.  

According  to  Parsons  (2017),  within  the  framework  of  the  stratified 

sampling  method,  the  main  unit  is  divided  into  subgroups  (blocks). Each such 

block  consists  of  elements 

that  correspond 

to 

it  and  have  common 

characteristics.  It  is  important  to  note  that  all  the  subgroups  present  clear 

differences  from  each  other,  but  at  the  same  time  they  belong  to  the  same 

concept  –  the  main  divisional  unit.  Further,  in  accordance with the established 

criteria,  a  sample  of  suitable  items  is  formed.  The  number  of  selected  units  is 

not  pre-determined  and  depends  entirely  on  meeting  certain  criteria.  For  this 

reason,  not  all blocks can be taken into account. The relevance of the stratified 

sampling  method  for  use  in  this  paper  is  also  emphasized  by  Jain  &  Shukla 

(2025),  who  claim  that  it  has  wide  application  in  humanitarian  and  political 

studies. 

Starting  to  form  a  sample,  it  is  necessary  to  identify  criteria  for 

determining  the  political  leaders  whose  speeches  are  to  be  chosen  and  then 

analyzed. Compliance with the following characteristics is mandatory: 

 
73 

-  The  president  delivered  speeches  in  the  21st  century  in  the 

USA; 

The  presence  of  this  criterion  is  due  to  the  need  for  research  to  meet  the 

scientific interests formed in the current century. Further, the choice of political 

leaders  who  present  their  speeches  precisely  within  the  framework  of  their 

activities  in  the  United  States  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  the culture of this 

country  has  historically  been  influenced  by  other  nations  (Eller,  2015).  This 

process  of  mixing  continues  nowadays,  which  is  often  reflected  in  political 

discourse.  Thus,  the  cultural  background  of  the  country's  citizens  is  diverse, 

which affects the use of certain language structures. 

-  The president held this position for two terms. 

The  presence  of  this  criterion  is  due  to  the  fact  that  speeches  presented  in  the 

second  presidential  race,  and  then  in  the  presentation  of  the  victory  speech 

(during  the  second  presidential  term),  traditionally  have  a  greater  number  of 

cultural  references  (allusions)  and  culturally-loaded  linguistic  features.  This 

aspect meets the goals set within the framework of this research. 

Moreover,  since  this  study  focuses  primarily  on  presidential  speeches 

from  the  entire  concept  of  political discourse, the overall sample includes only 

items  from  the  blocks  of  this  subtype  (see  Appendix).  Namely,  these  are 

debates,  pre-election,  campaign,  victory,  concession,  and  policy  speeches.  The 

criteria  for  sampling  political  speeches  are  based  not  only  on  an  established 

theoretical  framework,  but  also  on  preliminary analysis. Within the framework 

of  the  latter,  a  comprehensive  study  of  the  transcribed  text  was  performed, 

highlighting  culturally-loaded  linguistic  units,  rhetorical  strategies,  as  well  as 

expressive  means.  Based  on  this,  generalized  conclusions  were  made, 

tendencies  were  identified,  and  primary  information  was  obtained.  Thus,  the 

units  to  be  studied  must  necessarily  have the following characteristics in order 

for the sample to be diverse and representative: 

 
74 

-  The presence of a significant number of culturally-loaded units 

and cultural references; 

The  presence  of  this  criterion  is  due  to  the  fact  that  even  though  the  main 

purpose  of  all  speeches  within  the  framework  of  political  discourse  is 

persuading  and  manipulating  the  audience,  some  of  the  types  of  presidential 

speeches  do  not  have  a  wide  number  of  culturally  significant  items  (for 

example,  policy  speeches).  It  is  also  crucial  to  note  that  the  presence  of  the 

above-mentioned  criterion  is  determined  on  the  basis  of  the  preliminary 

analysis,  the  ideological  structure  of  which  is  described  above.  Moreover,  by 

highlighting  the  importance  of  cultural aspects in speeches, a correct sample is 

formed and is aimed at meeting the identified goals of the study. 

-  The presence of emotional density in speech. 

The  presence  of  this  criterion  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  despite  the  manipulative 

nature  of  speeches  in  political  discourse,  the  level  of  emotional  load can vary. 

Therefore,  based  on  the  established  theoretical  framework,  as  well  as  the 

preliminary  analysis,  it  is  possible  to  make  a  selection  of  those  types  of 

presidential  speeches  that  have  the  highest  emotional  density.  The  latter  is 

represented  in  presidential  speeches  with  the  use  of  verbal  and  non-verbal 

methods.  However,  the  implementation  of  specific  means  is  defined  by  the 

influence of the speaker's cultural background. 

The  criteria  established  for  political  leaders  whose  speeches  are  to  be 

included  in  the  sample  and  analyzed  are met by three US presidents who have 

served  two  terms  in  the  21st  century.  Namely,  these  are  George  Walker  Bush 

(George  W.  Bush  –  2001-2005,  2005-2009),  Barack  Hussein  Obama  (Barack 

Obama  –  2009-2013,  2013-2017)  and  Donald  John  Trump  (Donald  Trump  - 

2017-2021,  2025  -  present  moment).  Further,  there  are  two  main  types  of 

speeches  that  correspond  to  the  established  criteria  and  that  are to be added to 

the  sample.  Namely,  the pre-election and victory speeches delivered during the 

 
75 

second  presidential  term  of  each  of  the  political leaders and the corresponding 

pre-election races. 

Overall,  the  established  criteria  and  the  sample  obtained  on  their  basis 

are  aimed  at  receiving  the  most  representative  results,  which  can  be  used  to 

create correct and relevant conclusions for the field. Moreover, they also aim to 

answer the identified research questions and gaps in existing research. 

2.3 Content Analysis.  

Pre-election speech by Georger W. Bush (2004). 

-  Historical context: 

George  W.  Bush  began  his  first  presidential  term  in  2001,  becoming  the  43rd 

President of the United States. During the 4 years when he held this post, many 

events  took  place  in  the  country  that  affected  the  economic  and  social 

well-being of the USA. Further, it all was reflected in the pre-election campaign 

in  2004.  Namely,  the  terrorist  attack  in  New  York  on  September  9,  2001;  the 

beginning  of  the  anti-terrorist  campaign  and  the  start  of  military  operations 

(wars)  using  American  troops  in  Iraq  and  Afghanistan;  the  first  signs  of  the 

beginning of the economic crisis in the country; the lack of social programs that 

would  support  citizens;  the  establishment  of  new  political  ties  with  countries 

such as Russia; disputes in the country over tax codes and the overall promotion 

of  traditional  values  (rejection  of  LGBT  movements)  and  the  importance  of 

family. 

-  Topics emphasised in the message (speech): 

First and foremost, it is important to highlight that the choice of the main 

topics  that  are  covered  and  put  special  emphasis  on  in  the  given  speech  are 

greatly  influenced  by  the  communicative  situation  and  goals,  as  well  as  by 

cultural, social, and political events described above. As for the communicative 

situation,  it  is  a highly formal, ceremonial political speech, transmitted in front 

 
 
76 

of  the  Republican  National  Convention.  The  style  of  the  speech  totally 

corresponds 

to 

the 

requirements  and  characteristic 

features  of  such 

communicative  situations.  The  register  is  formal  and  authoritative,  marked  by 

numerous references to national values and collective achievements.  

Regarding  the  communicative  goals  of  this  utterance,  they  include,  first 

of  all,  persuasion  for  re-election  by  enumerating  multiple  accomplishments. 

Thus,  one  of  the  main  messages  highlighted  by  the  president  are  the 

achievements  reached  during  his  first  term,  involving  the  topic  of  economic 

growth, Education and Health reform.  

Second of all, the utterance aimed at presenting future policies in order to 

convince the audience of the benefits of the campaign. For this purpose, George 

Bush  enumerated  his  principles  (conservative values, faith, liberty, and family) 

and  plans  for  the  next  four  years, which comprise economic recovery (a better 

tax code, more career opportunities, free qualification traineeships, and others), 

energy  independence,   advancements  in  the  systems  of  Health,  Education 

(including  the  problem  with  racial  discrimination  in  school  and  university 

education), and Social Security. These themes are framed throughout the speech 

to remind the listeners of the principled agendas for the next term.  

Third  of  all,  the communicative goals have indeed been impacted by the 

events  happening  in  the  country at that moment. Therefore, a special emphasis 

in the speech is put on the September 11th terrorist attack, the War on Terror in 

the  Middle  East,  the  invasions  of  Afghanistan  and  Iraq  that  are  also  repeated 

throughout the speech. Last but not least, another vivid topic of the speech is the 

contrast between his and opponent’s policies, manifested in the critiques of John 

Kerry’s agenda. 

-  Cultural references and culturally-loaded linguistic units: 

The  first  aspect  to  consider  is  cultural  references,  which  can  also  be 

addressed as allusions. In the pre-election speech of President George W. Bush, 

 
 
77 

their  use  is  vivid  and  frequent,  mentioning  both  recent events in the history of 

the  United  States  and  fundamental  changes  in  various  realms  (i.e.  economic, 

political, and social),   as well as campaign policies of the president aimed at the 

development of the country. 

The  most common implementation of such a stylistic device in speech is 

due to the need to reinforce key aspects of a politician's pre-election campaign, 

frame  ideologies,  and  establish  a  certain  emotional  connection  with  the 

audience.  These  purposes  are  achieved  by  referencing  relevant  historical 

situations,  shared  knowledge,  famous  slogans  and  other  culture-specific 

concepts that emphasise the unity and represent the country as a whole.  

In  addition,  cultural  references,  or  allusions,  serve  the  functions  of 

manipulating  public  opinion  and  intensifying  the  emotional  density  of  the 

speech,  since  they  evoke  familiar  stories  and  situations  that  resonate  with  the 

audience’s  values  and  knowledge,  thus  influencing how people perceive issues 

or  policies  without  explicitly  stating  them.  It  is  crucial  to  emphasise  that 

allusions  have  exceptional  impact  on  the  overall  cultural load of the utterance, 

as  they  always  align  with  accepted  traditions  or  ideals,  cultural  symbols  and 

familiar  narratives  that  require  shared  knowledge  to  be decoded and perceived 

in  a  right  way.  Hence,  allusions  and  other  culture-specific  linguistic  units 

constitute  a  separate  part  of  the  content  analysis  within  the  framework  of  the 

linguistic and cultural approach in this research. 

  Some  of the most striking examples of the use of this stylistic device in 

George W. Bush's pre-election speech in accordance with the topics emphasised 

are the following: 

1.  The achievements of the first presidential term: 

-  “Now,  because  we  have  made,  the  hard  journey,  we  can  see  the  valley 

below”; 

 
78 

-  “Because  we  acted,  children  are  making  sustained  progress  in  reading 

and  math,  America's  schools  are  getting  better, and nothing will hold us 

back”; 

-  “I  brought Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen Medicare. 

Now seniors are getting immediate help buying medicine” 

These  are  references  to  the  accomplishments  that  George  Bush  and  his 

Republican  party  have  attained  during  his  first  term.  The  achievements  in  the 

domains  of  Health  and  education  are  alluded  to  and  showcasted to justify him 

being  elected  for  the  second  term  and frame the idea of the significance of the 

results achieved.  

2.  Underlying values and principles: 

-  “Our  society  rests  on  a  foundation  of  responsibility  and  character  and 

family commitment”; 

-  Because  family  and  work  are  sources  of  stability  and  dignity,  I  support 

welfare reform that strengthens family and requires work”; 

-  “I  believe  in  the  transformational  power  of  liberty:  the  wisest  use  of 

American strength is to advance freedom.” 

In  his  speech,  George  Bush  employs  multiple  allusions  to  the  core  American 

and  his  personal  traditional  values.  The  most  notable  of  them  comprise  the 

ideals  of  freedom  and  liberty,  family  and  duty  commitment,  faith  and 

responsibility  that  appeal  primarily  to  conservative  voters  and  help  establish  a 

reliable image a future leader should have.  

3.  Main policies of his election campaign: 

-  “We  will  make  our  country  less  dependent  on  foreign  sources  of 

energy…”; 

-  “In  a  new  term, I will lead a bipartisan effort to reform and simplify the 

federal tax code”; 

-  “In northeast Georgia, Gainesville Elementary School is mostly Hispanic 

and 90 percent poor…  We will leave no child behind.” 

 
79 

The  provided  examples  demonstrate  the  deliberate  use  of  references  to  the 

existing  social  and  economic  problems  that  negatively  impact  the  living 

conditions  of  the  citizens  and  require  solutions  promised  by  the  president.  In 

these  cases,  the  significance  of  the  policies  is  intentionally  emphasised  by 

alluding  to  the  problem  of  the  increased  inflation  and  tax  rates,  influenced  by 

the  rising  oil  prices  (partly  linked  to  Iraq  War  instability)  and  a  weakening 

dollar, the problems which require special knowledge of the country’s economic 

indicators that helps to enhance the effect produced on the audience. In addition, 

the  third  example  is  not  just  a  reference  to  the  crisis  and  underfunding  in 

Hispanic  education,  but  also  an  allusion  to  a  ‘No  Child  Left  Behind  Act’  that 

plays  a  role  of  a  strong  emotional  and  manipulative  appeal  in  the  overall 

passage related to the proposed Education reform. 

4.  The September 11th terrorist attack: 

-  “And  we  know  that  September  11th  requires  our  country  to  think 

differently…”; 

-  “I stood where Americans died, in the ruins of the Twin Towers.”; 

-  “Do  I  forget  the  lessons  of  September  11th  and  take  the  word  of  a 

madman…?” 

This  topic  stands  out  among  other  allusions  to  the  events  happening  in  the 

country  and  is  hence  pointed  out  as  a  separate  category.  It  was  especially 

important  for  George  Bush  to  reference  this  terrific  attack,  since  it  happened 

during  his  first  presidential  term.  The  allusions  to  this  tragedy  appear 

throughout  the  speech  and  are  frequently  implemented  to  convey  the  idea  of 

bravery and unity of Americans and inspire hope. He frames the last four years 

as  a  period  of  immense  challenge  and  asserts  that  the  country  has  become 

stronger and more powerful. The theme of security, both at home and abroad, is 

central, and these references help highlight Bush’s desire to protect the people.  

5.  Other historical events: 

 
80 

-  “...  the  murderous  regimes  of  Saddam  Hussein  and  the  Taliban  are 

history…”; 

-  “In  Afghanistan,  terrorists  have  done  everything  they  can  to  intimidate 

people  yet  more  than  10  million  citizens  have  registered  to  vote  in  the 

October presidential election…” ; 

-  “Reformers, and political prisoners, and exiles will hear the message that 

their dream of freedom cannot be denied forever.” 

Overall,  a  great  number  of  extracts  from  the  speech  contains  references  to the 

notorious  regimes  of  Saddam  Hussein’s  government  in  Iraq  and  the  Taliban 

regime  in  Afghanistan.  By  declaring  these  regimes  “history,”  Bush  frames  the 

U.S.  military  interventions  as  successful  and  justified  (mainly  those  emerging 

during his first term), reinforcing the concept of America being a liberator. The 

second  example  refers  to  the  first  democratic  presidential  election  in 

Afghanistan  (October  2004)  and  is  used  intentionally  as  an  evidence  to  his 

statement,  showing  that  U.S.  actions  have  brought  tangible progress and hope, 

not just regime change. Final statement once again alludes to the problems with 

the restriction of certain rights and freedom as a central value that he as a future 

leader  protects  and  can  guarantee  to  the  citizens,  framing  the  idea  of  his 

beneficial policies that correspond to the needs of the society.  

Next, the linguistic and cultural analysis of George W. Bush’ pre-election 

speech  has  also  revealed  the  occurrence  of  other  culturally-loaded  linguistic 

units that reflect the overall linguo-cultural image of the speaker. As it has been 

already  established  in  the  theoretical  part  of  the  study  (see  section  1.3),  a 

culture-specific  unit refers to a word, phrase, or other linguistic expression that 

carries  particular  cultural  connotations,  meanings,  or  associations  unique  to  a 

particular language community and culture.  

Firstly, phraseological units that fall into that category are to be outlined, 

since  their meanings often go beyond the literal meaning and are formed under 

the  influence  of  the   cultural,  historical,  and  communicative  contexts  within  a 

 
 
 
81 

certain  language.  The  given  speech  contains  a  quite  high  number  of  set 

expressions, the main role of which in the framework of political discourse is to 

resonate  with  the  audiences  by  utilising  familiar  phrases  and  notions.  Further, 

some of the peculiar examples of phraseological units utilised in the speech are 

presented and commented on: 

-  “We have seen a shaken economy rise to its feet”; 

-  “... because the lives of our citizens are at stake”; 

-  “This will not happen on my watch.” 

These examples demonstrate the use of fixed expressions the meanings of which 

cannot  be  fully  deduced  without  special  knowledge.  Utilising  these  devices, 

George  Bush  covers  ideas  succinctly  and  more  vividly  with  emotional  and 

evaluative  connotations.  In  general phraseological units help to frame issues in 

ways  that  align  with  the  political  agenda,  subtly  shaping  public  opinion  and 

guiding  the  audience’s  interpretation  of  events  or  policies.  Regarding  the 

influence  on  the  perception  of  the  message,  the  evaluative  component  of  the 

fixed  expressions  employed  in  the  formal  discourse  can  reinforce  emotional 

impact, thus manipulating audience attitudes. 

Secondly,  another  crucial  aspect  that  encompasses  culture-specific 

elements  is  a conceptual metaphor. This type of metaphor is distinguished by 

its connection with the environment and context in which it is utilised. It is used 

in  political  speeches  to  make  abstract  or  complex  concepts  become  more 

concrete  or  visualised,  making  them  easier  for  audiences  to  grasp  and  

memorise.  The  examples  of  their  use  in  the  analysed  pre-election  speech 

include: 

-  “And we have seen Americans in uniform storming mountain strongholds 

and charging through sandstorms”; 

-  “We will extend the frontiers of freedom”;  

-  “The story of America is the story of expanding liberty: an ever-widening 

circle, constantly growing to reach further and include more.”  

 
82 

By  framing  military  action  as  “storming  strongholds”  and  “charging  through 

sandstorms”  or  “freedom  as  an  expanding  frontier,”  metaphors  manipulate 

public  opinion  by  figuratively  describing  policies  as  relevant,  necessary,  and 

aligned  with  national 

ideals.  These  examples  represent  culture-specific 

meanings  that  require  either  the knowledge of history or core ideologies of the 

president’s campaigns.  

Thirdly,  the  analysis  of  the  speech  has  shown  that  the  president  utilised 

not only the devices that always embody cultural connotations (e.g., as allusion 

and  phraseological  units),  but  other  stylistic  means  through which some of the 

references  or  concepts  have  been  transmitted.  For  example,  some  instances 

when personification that contains the hidden narrative has been detected:  

-  “We saw tragedy arrive on a quiet morning…”; 

-  “...the bravery of rescuers grow with danger”; 

- 

. “... because ownership brings security, and dignity…” 

Most  personifications  in  the  speech  are  utilised  by  George  Bush  to  express 

major  cultural  values  that  are  framed  and  alluded  throughout  within  his 

message. Additionally, some of them strongly align with Bush’s rhetorical style, 

especially  his  emphasis  on  faith,  patriotism,  dignity,  and  America’s  global 

mission of ‘expanding liberty’. 

Further  on,  the  theoretical  overview  of  the  culturally-loaded  linguistic 

features  in political discourse (see Section 1.4) has established that metonymy, 

and  its  special  cases  (i.e.  synecdoche  and  antonomasia)  can  also  denote 

specific  connotations  that  need  to  be  identified  to  be comprehended right. The 

following curious examples have been detected: 

-  “And  we  have  seen  Americans 

in  uniform  storming  mountain 

strongholds…”; 

-  “That  young  man  is  right  -  our  men  and  women in uniform are doing a 

superb job for America”;  

 
 
 
83 

-  “...  and  for  that  we  can  all  thank  the  white-haired  lady  sitting  right  up 

there.” 

As 

the  statements  above  show,  metonymy  and 

its  subtypes  can  be 

culture-specific  because  the  associations  they  rely  on  depend  on  shared 

knowledge  of  institutions,  symbols,  famous people, and other factors. The first 

two examples evoke a particular image of the military forces with a uniform as 

their  distinctive  feature that is intertwined with America’s cultural and national 

identity.  Most  importantly,  Bush  employs  the  notions  of  ‘men  and  women  in 

uniform’  and  other  military-related  terms (e.g., “I serve America”; “I serve the 

American  people”),  as  this  topic  is  highly  interrelated  with  his  cultural 

background,  in  particular  his  experience  in  the  the  Texas  Air  National  Guard 

and  position  as  a  military pilot. Concerning the last example, it is antonomasia 

with  the use of which the president refers to his mother, without clarifying that 

explicitly  in  the  speech.  Thus,  this  description  greatly  depends  on  the  context 

without which the address is difficult to understand.  

The  first  Bush’s  presidential  term  is  characterised  by  his  extensive 

attempts to recover economic indicators of the country, including his Economic 

Growth  and  Tax  Relief  Reconciliation  Act  of  2001  and  Jobs  and  Growth  Tax 

Relief  Reconciliation  Act  of  2003.  Therefore,  in  his  speech  for  the  re-election 

for  the  second  time,  the  president  used  a  variety of devices besides allusion to 

highlight  his  intentions to continue the fruitful work on the development of the 

country’s  economy.  For example, the speech is marked by quite a high number 

of  hyperboles  that  contain  references  to  his  future  policies  and  are  used  to 

intensify  their  significance.  The  following  examples  demonstrate  such  an 

implementation:  

-  “...  one  of  the  most  dramatic  economic  shifts  our  society  has 

seen”; 

-  “I will ensure each and every poor county in America has...”; 

 
84 

-  “We're  providing  a  record  level  of  funding  in  the  history  of 

America.” 

The  hyperboles  identified  in  Bush’s  speech  serve  a  clear  rhetorical  purpose. 

They  enhance  the  perceived  impact  and  ambitions  of  his  economic  agenda, 

strengthening  his  appeal  to  voters.   For  instance,  the  use  of   “each  and  every 

poor county” employs an absolute qualifier, while the phrase “the most dramatic 

economic  shifts  our  society  has  seen”  consists  of  both  the  exaggeration  in  the 

form  of  superlative  degree  of  comparison  with  an  emotive  by  its  nature 

adjective,  and  the  verbal  phrase  that  intensifies  the  overall  meaning.  In  the 

paradigm  of  this  speech,  this  device  is  aimed at convincing the audience of an 

‘unprecedented’  support  that  George  Bush,  as  a  future  leader,  proposes  to  the 

citizens. 

Finally,  this  part  of  the  content  analysis  sheds  light  on  the  use  of  irony 

that  has  frequently  occurred  in  Bush's  speech.  The  main  functions  that  this 

device  performs  in  political  communication  are  the  emotional  engagement  of 

the audience and the manipulation of the public views in many ways, including 

an  indirect  delivery  of  criticism  or  debate,  and  interpretation  of  the  implied 

meanings  transmitted in a more informal, ironic tone. Some of the examples of 

such instances that contain clear underlying cultural connotations include: 

-  “Again,  my  opponent  takes  a  different  approach. In the midst of war, he 

has  called  America's  allies,  quote,  a  "coalition  of  the  coerced  and  the 

bribed."  That would be nations like Great Britain, Poland,…, and others 

allies  that  deserve  the  respect  of  all  Americans,  not  the  scorn  of  a 

politician.”; 

-  “Then he said he was "proud" of that vote. Then, when pressed, he said it 

was  a  "complicated"  matter.  There  is  nothing  complicated  about 

supporting our troops in combat.”; 

-  “In  the  last  four  years,  you  and  I  have  come  to  know  each  other…  You 

may  have  noticed  I  have  a  few  flaws,  too.  People  sometimes  have  to 

 
 
85 

correct my English. I knew I had a problem when Arnold Schwarzenegger 

started doing it.” 

Having  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  contexts  in  which  irony  has  been 

utilised  in  the  above  mentioned  examples,  as  well  as  the  knowledge  of  the 

background  of  the  speaker,  it  is  possible  to  conclude  that  these  examples  are 

indeed culturally-loaded. The first two uses are cases of critical irony, in which 

George  Bush  highlights  the  opponent’s  disrespectful  remarks  and  actions 

towards  the  U.S  allies,  contrasting  them  with  the  respect  Bush  believes  they 

deserve.  Furthermore,  these  implementations  of  the  device  also  align  with  the 

president’s  military  past  and  frame  his  political  emphasis  on  lasting  military 

support. 

As for the last example, it showcases a self-deprecating irony that echoes 

the president’s personal history, in particular, his Texas accent and the instances 

of using the informal speaking style. By ironically speaking about these “flaws,” 

he humanises himself, builds a closer connection with the audience. In addition 

to  that,  the  reference  to  Arnold  Schwarzenegger,  a  former  Republican  and 

current  celebrity,  adds  a  culturally-specific  aspect  familiar  to  American 

audiences, especially in the early 2000s political environment. 

-  Emotional density of the speech:  

Rhetorical  strategies  (pathos,  logos,  ethos, and kairos) are powerful linguistic 

tools  used  for  emotional  impact,  as  well  as  persuasion  and  proof  of  the 

correctness  of  the  idea  that  is  being  broadcasted  to  the  audience.  In  his 

pre-election  speech,  George  W.  Bush makes extensive use of only one of three 

key  aspects,  namely  pathos.  This  may  be  due  to  the  connection  between 

emotional  addressing  and  the  use  of  cultural  references,  in  other  words, 

allusions.  It  is  important  to  note  that  sometimes  this  technique  can  be 

implemented  not  only  in separate sentences, but also in paragraphs as a whole. 

The latter can occur in George Bush’s pre-election speech in two cases: 

 
 
86 

-  when  the  President  describes  the  personal  story  of  a  citizen  of  the 

country; 

-  when the President uses an extended description of cultural and historical 

events. 

Proper use of pathos in political discourse is related to speech etiquette and the 

manipulation strategy built by the speaker. Namely, that excessive emotionality 

can lead to a backlash from the audience - disgust and rejection. 

To  begin  with,  the  use  of  pathos  in  individual  sentences,  and  what  kind  of 

emotional load it conveys is being considered: 

-  “To  stand  with  workers  in  poor  communities  and  those  that  have  lost 

manufacturing, 

textile,  and  other 

jobs  we  will  create  American 

opportunity zones…” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses emotional impact tactics by mentioning 

the  difficult  situation  of  certain  groups  of  people,  namely  workers  in  poor 

communities  and  those  who  lost  their  jobs  due  to  the  economic  crisis  in  the 

country.  In  addition,  it  is  crucial  to  take  into  account  that  such  addressing  to 

citizens  is  combined with the idea of the importance of support by maintaining 

certain  decisions  and  measures.  This  sentence  conveys  a  positive  attitude  and 

ideology of cooperation, regardless of social status. 

-  “...I will never relent in defending America whatever it takes.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  a  different  tactic  of  emotional  impact, 

talking  not  about  the  citizens  of  the  country,  but  about  the  sacrifices  he  is 

willing  to  make  to  protect  the  United  States.  In  addition,  the  presence  of  an 

intensifier "never" in the sentence, as well as an idiom in the sense of complete 

dedication,  fully  affects  the  emotional  perception  of  the  transmitted  idea.  This 

sentence  reflects  the  general  attitude  about  the  seriousness  of  the  approach  to 

problem  solving  and  the  desire  to  take  all  possible  measures  to  protect  the 

country. 

 
87 

-  “These  changing  times  can  be  exciting  times  of  expanded  opportunity. 

And  here,  you  face  a  choice.  My  opponent's  policies  are  dramatically 

different from ours…” 

In this example, George W. Bush uses emotional influence tactics by describing 

the  best  prospect  for  the  country's  citizens,  which  can  only  be  achieved  if  he 

becomes  president.  In  addition,  the  presence  of  an  intensifier  "dramatically" 

emphasizes the polarity of the possible future, which also has a significant effect 

on  the  audience.  It  is  also  crucial  to  identify  that the President establishes that 

these  are  the  citizens  who  have  to  make  this  choice,  and  he  only  offers  those 

most  cherished  opportunities.  This  sentence  describes  two  possible  ways  for 

countries  to  develop  in  the  future,  emphasizing  the  positivity  and  success  of 

only one of them, which emotionally attracts attention. 

Before  considering  other  devices,  it  is  important to establish that mostly 

rhetorical strategies perform the function of provoking emotion to one degree or 

another. However, they vary from the communicative  goal and and traditionally 

relate  to  various  manifestations  of  feelings,  such  as  authority,  pity,  reliability, 

and  others.  There  are  also  those  that  do  not  have  a  strong  connection  with 

emotional  aspects.  but  rather  have  a  manipulative  nature.  Nevertheless,  all  of 

them  are  aimed  at achieving the identified communicative goals. Based on this 

idea,  it  is  possible  to  move  on  to  the  next rhetorical strategy to be analyzed in 

George  W.  Bush's  election  speech  is  ethos.  This  tool  is  used  to  create  trust 

relations  between  the  speaker  and  the  audience,  in  other  words,  a  call  for 

credibility  and  authority.  The  most  representative  examples  of  this  method  of 

establishing an emotional connection are the following: 

-  “I believe we have a moral responsibility to honor America's seniors so I 

brought Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen Medicare.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  the  tactic  of  creating  an  emotional 

connection  by  mentioning  responsibility  to  certain  social  groups,  as  well  as 

ethical  and  ideological  obligations  to  the  entire  nation.  It  is  interesting to note 

 
88 

that  the  president  is  not  talking  about  his  duties  caused  by  the  position,  but 

about  the  fact  that  it  is  shared  by  all  citizens  of  the  country.  Nevertheless, 

George  W.  Bush  is  the  only  one  who  makes  the  final.  In  addition,  the 

organisation of joint participation of two opposition parties in solving problems 

the  subsequent  mention  of  this  increases  the  speaker's  authority  among  the 

audience.  The  sentence  aims  to  establish  an  emotional  bond  between  the 

President and the listeners by using a sense of trustworthiness. 

-  “In  a  new  term,  I  will  ensure  every  poor  county  in  America  has  a 

community or rural health center.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  a  slightly  different  tactic of creating an 

emotional  connection,  mentioning  not  national  responsibility,  but  his  personal 

obligations  to  the  people.  It is interesting to note that even just considering the 

problems  of not even the middle class, but poor areas that do not even have all 

the basic necessities helps to establish a connection with ordinary citizens based 

on  the  manifestation  of competencies and expertise. This sentence has a strong 

emotional  impact,  which  is  based  on  the  President's  expression  of  his 

authoritative attention to the lives of ordinary people. 

-  “To  create  jobs,  my  plan  will  encourage  investment  and  expansion  by 

restraining  federal  spending,  reducing  regulation,  and  making  tax  relief 

permanent.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  the  same  tactic  to  create  an  emotional 

connection, mentioning his personal commitment to the people and his desire to 

improve their lives. It is interesting to note that this time the President describes 

in  a broader format what measures he will take to address the shortage of jobs. 

However,  the  speaker  does  not  identify  the  reason for such a problem to exist. 

Moreover, George Bush constantly touches on topics of national interest such as 

taxes  and  investments  in  society,  which  predisposes  him  to citizens, creating a 

feeling  that  he  can  control  it.  The  sentence  sets  a  very  emotional  burden 

 
89 

between  the  president  and  various  segments  of  society,  which  is  based  on  a 

sense of control by a representative of the government. 

The  third  rhetorical  strategy  to  study  in  the  framework  of  the  43rd  US 

president's  pre-election  speech  is  logos.  This  tool  also  creates  a  specific 

emotional  correlation,  but  with  the  use  of  statistical  data,  facts,  and  strong 

semantic  arguments.  What  is  more,  the  deliberate  use  of  logos  can  be 

determined  by  the  manipulative  tactics  of  transmitting  information  and 

influencing  the  audience  by  the President The most representative examples of 

its implementation by the speaker are the following: 

-  “And most of those workers were men.” 

In this example, George W. Bush uses the tactic of mentioning historical facts. It 

is interesting to note that the President does not provide specific numerical data, 

but  speaks  using  generalization.  However, 

this  does  not  remove 

the 

manipulative  nature  of  using 

this  device.  The  sentence  aims  to  add 

persuasiveness to the speech for further impact on listeners. 

-  “Today, workers change jobs, even careers, many times during their lives, 

and in one of the most dramatic shifts our society has seen, two-thirds of 

all Moms also work outside the home.” 

In this example, George W. Bush uses a different tactic, namely the presentation 

of statistical data. In addition, the President mentions the topic of the traditional 

social roles of women and men in the family, which, combined with the peculiar 

demonstration  of the results of statistical analysis, have a greater impact on the 

audience.  This  synthesis  also  helps  to  navigate  the  interpretation  of  the 

transmitted information in such a way that the speaker can further influence the 

perception  of  other  messages.  The  sentence,  using  statistical  data,  makes  the 

speech more credible for the audience to perceive, which is used by the speaker 

in achieving the set results. 

 
90 

-  “Gainesville  Elementary  School is mostly Hispanic and 90 percent poor, 

and  this  year  90  percent  of its students passed state tests in reading and 

math.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  the  same  statistical  tactics,  but  in  the 

format  of  intentionally  mentioning  percentage  data.  The  President  also  once 

again  touches  on  topics  relevant  to  ordinary  citizens,  namely  the  level  of 

education of non-indigenous people in poor areas. In addition, statistical data is 

presented to the listener from two related topics at once - the origin of children 

in  impoverished  schools  in  percentage,  as  well  as  the  number  of  the  same 

students who successfully passed certain exams. The sentenceis aimed not only 

at  using statistical data to achieve manipulative goals identified by the speaker, 

but also at establishing an emotional connection with the audience by describing 

the problems and issues of concern to citizens. 

The  last  rhetorical  strategy  that  is  often  considered  to  be  a  separate 

technique is kairos. Its essence lies in properly determining the time, situational 

context, and audience's desires to correctly convey the message with the highest 

degree  of  manipulation.  Despite  the  fact  that  this  tool  is  very  useful  for 

influencing  a  wide  audience,  its  use  is  not  widespread  in  George  W.  Bush's 

pre-election speech. Based on this, the following examples can be highlighted: 

-  “The freedom of many, and the future security of our Nation, now depend 

on us. And tonight, my fellow Americans, I ask you to stand with me.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  an  interesting  manipulative  tactic,  first 

covering the topics of freedom and security that are relevant to US citizens, and 

then  claiming  that  everything  depends  not  on  him  as  president,  but  on  every 

representative of this nation. Only after that, the speaker proceeds to convey the 

message  he  needs  -  vote  for  him  in  the  presidential  election.  The  sentence  is 

formed  according  to  kairos  key  principles:  time,  situational  context,  and 

audience opinion are taken into account. Moreover, it can be fully considered as 

convincing and influencing the listeners, and has a call to action. 

 
91 

-  “We must, and we will, confront threats to America before it is too late.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  another  manipulative  tactic,  namely, 

drawing  a  parallel  between  what  the  nation  needs  to  do  and  convincing  the 

audience  that  its  realisation  is  a  part  of  his  plans.  Moreover,  emphasizing  the 

lack  of  time  for  decision-making  enhances  the  effect.  This  synthesis  leads  the 

speaker  to  not  only  influencing  listeners,  but  also predisposing them to further 

messages  transmition.  The  sentence,  using  kairos,  is  not  only  a  call  to  make 

certain decisions, but rather serves as a predisposition of the audience for further 

speech perception. 

-  “I believe this Nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership and 

that is why, with your help, we will win this election.” 

In  this  example,  George  W.  Bush  uses  another  manipulative  tactic,  which 

involves mentioning the beliefs that thу Зpresident has about fellow Americans, 

and  only  then  revealing  the  essence  of  what  he  wants.  Moreover,  a  certain 

"acting"  based  on  the  wishes  of  local  citizens,  presented  in  the  form  of  an 

enumeration,  also  creates  a  certain  context  and  mood  for the full disclosure of 

manipulative  influence.  The  sentence  predisposes  the  listener,  and  then 

broadcasts the speaker's desired idea, namely winning the presidential race. 

Due  to  the  fact  that  victory  speeches  are  traditionally  structured  as  an 

ideological  and semantic continuation of themes, ideas and messages conveyed 

during  pre-election  campaigns,  in  the  analysis,  a  separate  consideration  of  the 

use  of  certain  structures  or  strategies  within  this  type  of  speech  is  to  be  made 

only  if  they  represent  a  methodology  or  tactic  that  were  not  previously 

considered in other units. 

Victory speech by George W. Bush (2004). 

-  Topics emphasised in the message (speech): 

 
 
92 

In  the  victory  speech,  George  W.  Bush  creates  a  clear  ideological  connection 

with  his  pre-election  speech  and  with  the  problems  in  the  country  that  were 

identified  during  the  political  campaign  and  what  measures  could  be  taken  to 

solve  them.  This  justifies  a  large  number  of  cultural  references  (allusions)  not 

only  to  historical  events  related  to  the  United  States,  but  also  to  the  ideas  put 

forward in previously presented speeches. Based on all of the above-mentioned 

facts, the following topics can be identified as key to George W. Bush's victory 

speech: 

1.  Achievements and results of the pre-election campaign; 

2.  Gratitude to the family, the party and the citizens; 

3.  A promising new future for the country; 

4.  How  the  achievement  of  the  citizens  influenced  the  development  of  the 

country. 

Throughout George W. Bush's speech, regardless of the topic, the importance of 

citizens  of  all  ages  and  backgrounds  for  the  existence,  development  and 

strengthening of the United States is emphasised. This choice of topics from the 

pre-election speech to be mentioned in the victory one may be due to the need to 

strengthen the national spirit after the tragic events of September 9, 2001. Thus, 

the disclosure of future plans for the country with a focus on the memory of the 

victims  fully  conveys  the  importance  and  relevance  of  using  emotions  as  a 

method of manipulation. 

-  Cultural references and culturally-loaded linguistic units: 

In  his  speech,  George  W.  Bush  uses  a large number of culturally-loaded 

linguistic  units  that  make  the  speech  more  emotional  and  manipulative.  The 

speaker  used  cultural  references  (allusions)  as  the  main  means  of  conveying 

culturally specific ideologies, the implementation of which is conditioned by the 

need  to  reflect  the  needs  of  the  audience.  The  following  examples  can  be 

mentioned: 

 
 
93 

1.  Cultural references: 

-  “We'll reform our outdated tax code.” 

-  “We will uphold our deepest values of family and faith.” 

-  “Our military has brought justice to the enemy…” 

2.  Phraseological units: 

-  “Do not pray for tasks equal to your powers; pray for powers equal to 

your tasks”  

-  “...the vigor of this economy.” 

3.  Metonymy: 

-  “I want to thank you for your prayers on the rope lines” 

-  “... for your kind words on the rope lines” 

- 

‘The vice president serves America…” 

4.  Hyperbole 

-  “ Our nation served the freedom of all mankind” 

-  “We'll make public schools all they can be” 

-  “The voters turned out in record numbers and delivered an historic 

victory” 

-  Emotional density of the speech: 

George  W.  Bush  makes  extensive  use  of  rhetorical  strategies  in  his 

victory speech. This applies to both the main devices (namely, pathos, ethos and 

logos)  and the additional one, which is kairos. Interestingly, the president often 

uses  cultural  references  to  create  emotional  density.  In  addition,  when 

comparing the tactics used in the pre-election and victory speeches, it is possible 

to  identify  the  interconnection  between  them.  In  some  cases,  the speaker even 

used identical lexical structures. 

The  first  rhetorical  strategy  to  be  analyzed  is  pathos,  which  is 

traditionally  used  to  create  a  certain  connection  between  the  speaker  and  the 

 
 
94 

audience.  The  most  practically  significant  examples  within  the  framework  of 

George W. Bush's victory speech are the following: 

-  “I'm humbled by the trust and the confidence of my fellow citizens” 

-  “We  will  fight  this  war  on  terror  …  so  our  children  can live in freedom 

and in peace” 

-  “I will always be grateful to the good people of my state” 

The  second  rhetorical  strategy  that  should  be  studied  within  the 

framework  of  the  victory  speech  is  ethos.  This  device  aims  to create a certain 

connection  between  the  speaker  and  the  audience,  evoking  a  sense  of  trust, 

authority  and  credibility. Some of the examples from George W. Bush's speech 

are the following: 

-  “And I will do my best to fulfill that duty every day as your president.” 

-  “I will do all I can do to deserve your trust.” 

-  “  I'm  proud  to  lead  such  an  amazing  country,  and  I'm  proud  to  lead  it 

forward.” 

Due to the established communicative goal of the victory speech, George 

W.  Bush  does  not  implement  logos  and  kairos,  and  establishes  emotional 

connection and density through other methods. 

Pre-election speech by Barack Hussein Obama (2012). 

-  Historical Context: 

Barack  Hussein  Obama  began  his  presidential  term  in  2008,  becoming 

the  44th  president  of  the  United  States.  The  beginning  of  his  duties  in  this 

position was not easy, as the country was in economic decline after the financial 

crisis  of  2007-2008.  For this reason, the new President made decisions quickly 

but radically: The Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was passed, 

the slowdown in outsourcing and the return of factories to the United States, the 

 
 
95 

development of the industry of renewable energy, as well as tax cuts for certain 

segments of society.  

However,  the  problems  that  the  45th  president  had  to  solve  did  not  end 

there:  in  2010,  the  largest  environmental  disaster  in  the  country's  history 

occurred,  namely,  an  explosion  on  the  Deepwater  Horizon  oil  production 

platform,  which  caused  about  5  million  barrels  of  oil  to  enter  the  water. 

Touching on the topic of US foreign policy, it is crucial to mention that in 2011, 

the  president  withdrew  troops  from  Iraq,  which  marked  the  end  of  the  war  (it 

was  launched  by  ex-presidents  George  W.  Bush  as  part  of  an  anti-terrorism 

campaign after the terrorist attack in New York on September 9, 2001).  

In  an  attempt to improve relations with the countries of the Middle East, 

Barack  Obama  put  forward  a slogan calling for democratization of the internal 

structure  of  States.  This  led  to  the  beginning  of  a  number  of  revolutions  in 

countries  such  as  Algeria,  Tunisia,  Libya,  Yemen,  Egypt  and  other  countries. 

This  historical  moment  was  called  the  Arab  Spring.  Despite  all  the president's 

attempts  to  improve  both  internal  and  external  communications  of  the  United 

States, other mistakes on the part of the Barack Obama administration continued 

to  appear  anyway,  and  they  recognized  this.  The  most  striking  example  is  the 

2011  invasion  of  Libya  by  American  troops,  from  which  the  country  is  still 

recovering. 

-  Topics emphasised in the message (speech): 

To  begin  with,  it  is  important  to  establish  that  the  choice  of  topics  for 

disclosure  within  the  framework  of  the  pre-election  speech  in  the  second 

presidential race of Barack Obama was determined by both the main directions 

of  his  campaign  and  the  cultural,  social  and  political  needs  of  the  nation.  The 

communicative  situation  was  undoubtedly  taken  into  account.  Namely,  the 

speech was presented at the Democratic National Convention, and, accordingly, 

the  audience  shared  the  speaker's  political  views.  Even  taking  this  aspect  into 

 
 
96 

account,  Barack  Obama  did not neglect speech behaviour and etiquette, formal 

speech style and the establishment of a clear message, which is an integral part 

of political discourse. 

The  following  topics  can  be  identified  as the main ideological messages 

of this pre-election speech: 

-  The achievements of the first presidential term; 

-  The  revival  of  manufacturing  in  the  country,  creation  of  new  jobs  and 

trade relations; 

-  Reducing taxes and inflation for basic needs; 

-  The  development  of  renewable  energy  and  the  reduction  of  U.S. 

dependence on imported sources; 

-  Reforms in the fields of education and healthcare. 

The  disclosure  of  all 

these 

themes 

is  aimed  at  achieving 

the 

communicative goal of the speech, namely, confirming why Barack Obama, and 

not  his  Republican  opponent,  should  become  the  next  president.  At  the  same 

time,  each  of  these  aspects  is  touched  upon  for  the  reason  that  it  is  an  urgent 

topic of thought among representatives of the middle class and the poor, who at 

that  time  made  up  about  65%  of  the  US  population.  Controlling  the  level  of 

inflation  and  taxes,  starting  reforms  in education and healthcare, as well as the 

creation  of  new  jobs  are  things  that  can  change  the  lives  of  ordinary  citizens, 

which  means  they  will  attract  their  attention  and  force  them  to  vote  for  the 

Democrat. 

-  Cultural references and culturally-loaded linguistic units: 

To  begin  with,  Barack  Obama’s  2012  pre-election  speech  contains  a 

broad  range  of allusions and cultural references that enrich its rhetorical power 

and  enhance  its  emotional  density.  Based  on  the  critical  discourse  analysis, 

applied  within  the  framework  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach,  it  has  been 

identified that the most numerous allusions presented in this utterance represent 

 
 
97 

the  references  to  the  actions  that  the  future  president  promises  to undertake in 

the  next  term,  including  his  plans  to  recover  the  economy  of  the country after 

the  presidency  of  George  W.  Bush  (i.e.  tax  and  inflation  rates,  and  energy 

sources)  and  to  improve  working  and  living  conditions  of  the  people.  These 

topics are framed throughout Obama’s speech, strengthening the overall impact 

of his speech, as well as fostering unity and motivating collective action. 

1.  The accomplishments of the first presidential term: 

-  “Now,  I’ve  cut taxes for those who need it – middle-class families, small 

businesses…”  

-  “I've  signed  trade  agreements  that  are  helping  our  companies sell more 

goods to millions of new customers;” 

-  “For  the  first  time  in  a  generation,  nearly every state has answered our 

call to raise their standards for teaching and learning.” 

Taking into account the historical context accompanying this utterance, it 

becomes  evident  that  these  allusions  function  as  evidence  of  effective 

governance, reinforcing Obama’s image as a credible, results-driven leader. For 

example,  the  first  statement  refers  to  his  policies  during  the first elections and 

presidency  period,  which  have been justified, since Barack Obama managed to 

make the economy of the United States steady despite the fact that he governed 

right  after  the  Great  Recession  economic  crises.  Therefore,  cultural  and 

historical references in this case also serve a legitimising role, reminding voters 

that  his  policies  have  provided  measurable  progress,  thus  justifying  continued 

support and re-election.  

2.  The proposed policies of the election campaign: 

-  “Over the next few years, big decisions will be made in Washington – on 

jobs, the economy, taxes and deficits, energy, education, war and peace;” 

-  “The path we offer may be harder but it leads to a better place;” 

-  “We  can  choose  a  future  where  we  export  more  products  and outsource 

fewer jobs.” 

 
98 

As  it  has  been  already  stated,  the  allusions  to  this  topic  are  the  most 

numerous  in  Barack  Obama’s  message.  They  are  carefully  and  sometimes 

implicitly  transmitted  through  the  linguistic  means  to  inspire  confidence  and 

persuade  the  voters  by  offering  a  clear,  hopeful  vision  that  is  echoed  in  the 

politician’s campaign. In addition, they also serve as strong appeals to emotions, 

since  they  include  the  enumeration  of  the  relevant  issues of the overwhelming 

majority  of  the  citizens.  The  first  example  clearly  demonstrates  the  spheres of 

life  that  Barack  Obama  promises  to  improve  and  hence,  alludes  to  them  very 

often within the utterance to highlight their significance. 

3.  References to political opponents: 

-  “Our  friends  down  in  Tampa  at  the  Republican  convention  were  more 

than happy to talk about everything they think is wrong with America, but 

they didn’t have much to say about how they’d make it right;” 

-  “I  don’t  believe  that  another  round  of  tax  breaks  for  millionaires  will 

bring good jobs to our shores;” 

-  “After  all  we’ve  been  through,  I  don’t  believe  that  rolling  back 

regulations  on  Wall Street will help the small businesswoman expand, or 

the  laid-off  construction  worker  keep  his  home.  We  have  been  there. 

We’ve tried that. And we’re not going back.” 

These  allusions  serve  multiple  rhetorical  functions,  that  are  of  utmost 

relevance  in  the  paradigm  of  political  discourse  –   they  clarify  ideological 

differences, manipulate the listeners to vote for the Democratic party by framing 

Republicans  as  those who do not keep their promises, persuading the uncertain 

voters through appeals to economic justice and stability. The first two examples 

demonstrate  criticising  references  to  the  Republicans’  policies,  implying  that 

their  campaigns  lack  constructive  and  goal-oriented  proposals.  This  is  a 

manipulative  tactic  used  to  enhance  the  future  president’s  credibility  by 

intentionally comparing his actions to the drawbacks of the opponents. The third 

 
99 

statement  evokes  the 2008 financial crisis, positioning Obama as a protector of 

the middle class, since he was the one who put an effort into its recovery. 

4.  References to current societal, political, or economic problems: 

-  “Eight years later, that hope has been tested   – by the cost of war, by one 

of the worst economic crises in history…” 

-  “...  political  gridlock  that’s  left  us  wondering  whether  it’s  still  even 

possible to tackle the challenges of our time;” 

-  “Families  struggled with costs that kept rising but paychecks that didn’t, 

folks  racking  up  more  and  more  debt  just  to  make  the  mortgage  or  pay 

tuition, put gas in the car or food on the table. 

Regarding  the  above  mentioned  references,  their  main  function  is  to 

‘humanise’ the formal political discourse, demonstrating that Barack Obama, as 

a  future  national  leader,  understands  and  shares  the  audience’s  concerns. 

Furthermore, they underline the urgency of his policy agenda and in some cases 

even act as call-to-action appeals by convincing the audience that the only way 

to solve the existing problems is to have him as a president.  

5.  The president’s and American core values: 

-  “Ours  is  a  fight  to  restore  the  values  that  built  the  largest  middle  class 

and  the  strongest  economy  the  world  has  ever  known  –  the  values  my 

grandfather defended as a soldier in Patton’s Army;”  

-  “...   the values that drove my grandmother to work on a bomber assembly 

line.” 

-  “We, the people, recognize that we have responsibilities as well as rights; 

that  our  destinies  are  bound  together;  that  a  freedom  which  asks  only, 

what's in it for me, a freedom without a commitment to others, a freedom 

without love or charity or duty or patriotism,  is unworthy of our founding 

ideals and those who died in their defense.” 

It  is  worth  emphasising  the  fact  that  these  examples,  as  well  as  the 

majority  of  other  instances  of  the  use  of  this  device  to  refer  to  core  national 

 
100 

values,  represent  complex  constructions  that  usually  combine  conceptual 

metaphors, repetition, and expressive enumeration that are intentionally utilised 

in combination to convey memorable, highly culturally-resonant ideas. The first 

two  examples  are  powerful  emotional  appeals,  since  they  encompass  both 

personal  stories  and  references  to  military  notions  (his  grandfather’s  military 

service and the participation of his grandmother in WWII) that serve to connect 

Obama’s campaign to patriotism, sacrifice, and historical American strength.  

Moving  on  to  the  next  aspect  of  analysis,  the  phraseological  units  that  have 

been  implemented  by  Barack  Obama  are  to  be  discussed.  Some  of  their 

prominent examples include: 

-  “If you’re sick of hearing me approve this message, believe me, so am I;”  

-  “...  and  fulfill  the  basic  bargain  at  the  heart  of  America’s  story:  the 

promise that hard work will pay off;” 

-  “... everyone gets a fair shot, and everyone does their fair share.” 

These are the unique examples demonstrating three different types of the 

bound  culture-specific  units,  namely,  an  idiom,  a  saying,  and  a  proverbial 

expression.  Overall,  they  all  are  united  by  the  main  purpose  of  enhancing the 

relatability  of  the  messages  transmitted.  Through  the  use  of  these  expressive 

means,  the  speaker  appears  to  be  closer  to  the  audience  and  strengthens  the 

speech’s  persuasive  power  by  connecting  policy  messages  to  familiar, 

conversational language that unites the listeners and the politician. 

It  is  crucial  to  outline  that  Barack  Obama  has  employed  many  other 

lexical and syntactic stylistic devices and expressive means of language that are 

identified  in  the  detailed  in-text  analysis  of  the  speeches  (see  Appendix, 

Transcribed  and  Analysed  Speech  5.)  and  outlined  in  the  Results  Section. 

However, the most vivid examples of culturally-loaded language are manifested 

through the use of the above analysed linguistic techniques.  

-  Emotional density of the speech:  

 
 
 
101 

Barack Obama makes extensive use of rhetorical strategies in his speech. 

This applies to both the main aspects (namely, pathos, ethos and logos) and the 

additional  one,  which  is  kairos.  It is interesting to note that the President often 

uses  them  in  combination  with  cultural  references  (allusions)  that strengthen 

the emotional connection between the speaker and the audience, as well as make 

the  manipulative  effect  brighter  in  its  manifestation.  Revealing  the  essence  of 

the  latter,  the  regular  creation  of  a  context  for  influencing  makes  this  process 

easier each time, as it predisposes the listener more and more. 

The  first  rhetorical  strategy  for  analysis  is  pathos,  the  use  of  which  is 

accompanied  by  an  exceptional  emotionality  aimed  at  creating  a  connection 

between  the  speaker  and  the  listener.  The  most  vivid  examples  within  the 

framework of Barack Obama's pre-election speech are the following: 

-  “... a nation   where the most innovative businesses turned out the world’s 

best products, and everyone shared in that pride and success…” 

-  “... the values my grandfather defended as a soldier in Patton’s Army, the 

values that drove my grandmother to work on a bomber assembly line…” 

-  “If you’re sick of hearing me approve this message, believe me, so am I.” 

All three of the above-mentioned sentences use different tactics to appeal 

to  emotions, but this does not make them any less successful in achieving their 

goals. The first example uses a unified appeal to the nation, each representative 

of  which  experiences  rather  loaded  feelings  of  pride  towards  their  country 

because  of  its  global  successes.  The  second  example  is  based  on  the  fact  that 

Barack  Obama  implemented  the  description  of  the  life  difficulties  that  his 

grandparents  went  through  defending  the  values  of  the  nation  and  the  United 

States. The third example also uses a distinctive tactic, which is founded on the 

fact  that  the  President  equates  his  feelings  about  a  certain  issue  with  what  the 

citizens  are  experiencing.  All  these  sentences  have  different  emotional  loads, 

but they still help the speaker to influence listeners and shape their perception of 

information to a certain extent. 

 
102 

The  second  rhetorical  strategy to be studied within the framework of the 

pre-election  speech  is  ethos.  This  technique  is  aimed  at  establishing  a  certain 

connection by provoking the sense of trust, authority and credibility between the 

speaker  and  the  audience.  Some  of  the examples from Barack Obama's speech 

are the following: 

“I'm  no  longer  just  a  candidate:  I'm  the  President.  And...that  means  I  know 

what it means…” 

“I refuse to go along with that, and as long as I'm President I never will.” 

“And  yes,  my  plan  will  continue  to reduce the carbon pollution that is heating 

our planet…” 

In  the  case  of  these  sentences,  it  is  possible  to identify only two tactics. 

Namely, the first two examples establish a sense of authority and the correctness 

of the actions taken by mentioning the current post of Barack Obama, who was 

serving his first term, being at that time the 44th President of the United States. 

Thus, by emphasizing the fact that a politician has already managed to gain the 

trust  of  citizens  once,  he  predisposes  the  audience  to  perceive  not  only  the 

current,  but  also  the future message. At the same time, the third example has a 

different structure, which emphasizes that the plan described by the President is 

already being implemented, and will only continue to exist. This creates a sense 

of  trust  based  on  the  fact  that  Barack  Obama  is actually taking action to solve 

certain problems. Overall, all three examples illustrate the masterful use of ethos 

in political discourse in order to influence and predispose listeners. 

The  third  and last traditionally accepted rhetorical strategy is logos. This 

tool  is  based  on  providing  facts,  statistics,  and  any  other reliable arguments to 

support  the  message  idea  in  order  to  manipulate  the  audience's  perception. 

Barack  Obama  uses  logos  vividly  in  his  speech,  as  can  be  seen  from  the 

following examples: 

“...the  same  rate  we  had  when  our  economy  created  nearly  23  million  new 

jobs…” 

 
103 

“...  and  asks  the  wealthiest  households  to  pay  higher  taxes  on  incomes  over 

250,000 dollars…” 

“Independent  experts  say  that  my  plan  would  cut  our  deficit  by  four  trillion 

dollars 

In all three cases, numerical data is indicated, but the surrounding context 

affects  and  eventually  changes  the  workload  of each unit. In the first example, 

the President indicates the number of new jobs in order to reveal the essence of 

the  problem  and  influence  the  way  the  audience  perceives  this  information. 

However, the level of emotional density is reduced to a certain extent due to the 

use  of  the  word  "nearly"  before  numerical  data.  The  second  example,  on  the 

contrary,  enhances  the  manipulative  effect  by  creating  a  specific  polarity  with 

numerical  data  and using the word "over". At the same time, the third example 

has the highest density, as it includes both logos and ethos. Namely, the speaker 

first  creates  a  sense  of  trust  by  indicating  that experts have evaluated his plan, 

and  then  reinforces  it  by  emphasizing  a  specific  amount  of  money  by  which 

expenses  will  be  reduced.  Overall,  such  a  significant  difference  in  emotional 

and manipulative load can be justified by the fact that, depending on the speech 

section, Barack Obama may have different communicative goals. 

An  additional  rhetorical  strategy,  which  is  not  included  in  the  generally 

accepted  concept,  is  kairos.  Barack  Obama  demonstrates  superb  skills  at 

creating  the  context  for  using  this  technique.  It  is  crucial  to  note  that  the 

implication of kairos is often veiled, which is not the traditional approach of its 

application.  Therefore,  it  is  relevant  to  consider  different  variations  of  the 

manifestation of this rhetorical strategy in Barack Obama's pre-election speech: 

-  “...if  you  believe  in  a  country  where  everyone  gets  a  fair  shot  and 

everyone does their fair share and everyone plays by the same rules, then 

I need you to vote this November.” 

-  “If you reject the notion that this nation's promise is reserved for the few, 

your voice must be heard in this election.” 

 
104 

-  “You can choose the path where we control more of our own energy.” 

Considering  the  examples  mentioned above, it should be noted that each 

of  them  represents  specific  tactics  that  differ  from  each  other.  In  the  first 

example, Barack Obama uses emotional tension by describing a possible future, 

and  then  applying  a  direct  and  vivid  call  to  action  at  the  end  of  the  sentence. 

Such  a  "context  -  kairos"  structure  is  traditional  in  its  application.  The second 

example  uses  the  method  of  opposition  and  the  representation  of  a  negative 

future, which is also a strong manipulative tactic. However, unlike the first case, 

this  call  to  action  has  the  form  of  a  metaphor  and  is  not that explicit. The last 

sentence  also  uses  an  analogy  where  future  events  that  can  happen  in  the 

country  are  positioned  as  a  path  that  can  be  followed.  At  the same time, there 

are  several  possible  paths,  and  the  call  to  action  is  conveyed  through  the 

formulation  of  choosing  a  specific  road.  Overall,  all  three  tactics  are  effective 

manipulative strategies, but they still have clear differences, which are primarily 

evident in the context provided by Barack Obama. 

Victory speech by Barack Hussein Obama (2012) 

-  Topics emphasised in the message (speech): 

To  begin  with,  it  is  important  to  note  that  there  is  a  logical  correlation 

between  the  topics  that  Barack  Obama  covered  in  his  pre-election  speech  and 

the ones he revealed in his victory speech. At the same time, the communicative 

goal  is  completely  different  and  does  not  require  clarifying  details  to  gain 

authority  and  trust,  but  is  more  aimed  at  generalizing  the  future  path  of  the 

country.  An  important  structural  element  of  the  victory  speech  is  the 

“thank-you”  section,  in  which  the  newly  elected  president  expresses  his 

gratitude  not  only  to  the  citizens  of  the  country,  but  also  to  his  fellow  party 

members.  Based  on  this  idea,  the  following  key  themes  can  be  identified  in 

Barack Obama's victory speech: 

-  Achievements and results of the pre-election campaign; 

 
105 

-  Gratitude to the family, the party and the citizens; 

-  Citizens are the driving force of the United States; 

-  A promising new future for the country. 

By  studying  the  above-mentioned  topics  in  more  detail,  it  can  be 

determined  that  the  basis  of  victory  speech  is  a  high  emotional  load,  which  is 

traditionally manifested in a moment of gratitude to all those who supported the 

speaker,  highlighting  what  has  already  been  achieved  and  what  remains  to  be 

done.  As  a separate ideological element, Barack Obama emphasises the role of 

Americans, who shaped the country the way it is, as well as who are the driving 

force for further achievements. The unifying aspect throughout the speech is the 

creation  of  a  synthesis  between the key elements of the pre-election campaign, 

and  how some of them have already been achieved simply by choosing Barack 

Obama as president. 

-  Cultural references and culturally-loaded linguistic units: 

First  of  all,  the  victory  speech,  as  well  as  the  pre-election  speech 

delivered by Barack Hussein Obama, contains a large number of diverse cultural 

references,  which  can  also  be  called  allusions  to  cultural, social and historical 

aspects  of  the  formation  of  modern  USA.  Based  on  the  critical  discourse 

analysis, applied within the framework of linguistic and cultural approach to the 

study, certain culturally-loaded linguistic units were identified. 

Barack  Obama,  presenting  his  victory  speech  on  the  results  of the presidential 

election,  used  culturally-loaded  units  not  only  to  create  an  emotional 

connection,  but  also  to  strengthen  the  messages  conveyed.  This  is  most  often 

found in a combination with lexical stylistic devices.  

Regarding  the  topics  that  the  president  highlights,  it  is,  first  of  all,  the 

importance  of  ending  the  war  in the east, restoring the work of factories in the 

country,  as  well  as  reducing  dependence  on  imports  in  all  its  forms.  The 

 
 
106 

expression  of  all  these  ideas  occurs through culturally-loaded units in different 

manifestations. Some of the examples are: 

1.  Cultural references: 

“God bless you. God bless these United States.” 

“...despite  all  the  frustrations  of  Washington,  I've  never  been  more  hopeful 

about our future…” 

“...to  meet  the  challenges  we  can  only  solve  together  –  reducing  our  deficit, 

reforming  our  tax  code,  fixing  our  immigration  system,  freeing  ourselves  from 

foreign oil.” 

2.  Phraseological units: 

“...you made a difference…” 

“...the Romney family has chosen to give back to America…” 

“...I also look forward to…” 

3.  Metonymy: 

“...despite all the frustrations of Washington…” 

“...who turned out at our rallies and crowded along a rope line…” 

“... the task of perfecting our union.” 

4.  Hyperbole 

“...I have never loved you more…” 

“I have never been prouder…” 

“To the best campaign team and volunteers in the history of politics…” 

-  Emotional density of the speeches: 

Studying  the  emotional  impact  of  Barack  Obama's  victory  speech,  it  is 

important  to  establish  that the use of rhetorical strategies remains as vivid as it 

was  in  pre-election  speech.  However,  the  way  each  technique  forms  a 

connection between the speaker and the audience may be different. Moreover, it 

is  relevant  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  time  interval  between the two 

studied  units  is  about  two  months,  and  that  is  why  the  emotional  load  has 

 
 
107 

approximately  the  same  level.  The  difference  in  the  length  of  the  spoken 

message is also to be considered. 

To  begin  with,  the  rhetorical  strategy  of  appealing  to  emotions,  namely 

pathos, is to be analysed. Its use in Barack Obama's victory speech is extensive, 

as  the  speaker  speaks  to  a  significant  extent  about  gratitude  and  a  sense  of 

responsibility to the entire nation. The most striking examples in this speech by 

the 44th President of the United States are the following: 

-  “To the best campaign team and volunteers in the history of politics – the 

best – the best ever, some of you were new this time around, and some of 

you have been at my side since the very beginning.” 

-  “I have never been prouder to watch the rest of America fall in love with 

you too as our nation's first lady.” 

-  “I  want  to  thank  my  friend  and partner of the last four years, America's 

happy  warrior,  the  best  vice-president  anybody  could  ever  hope  for, Joe 

Biden.” 

The second rhetorical strategy that is being studied within the framework 

of  this  victory  speech  is  ethos.  Its  application  is  aimed  at  establishing 

connection  through  feelings  of  trust,  credibility  and  authority.  Some  of  the 

examples from Barack Obama's victory speech are the following: 

-  “The role of citizens in our democracy does not end with your vote.” 

-  “I  return  to  the  White  House  more  determined  and  more  inspired  than 

ever about the work there is to do and the future that lies ahead.” 

-  “And you've made me a better president.” 

The  third  and  at  the  same  time  the  last  traditionally  accepted  rhetorical 

strategy is logos. Its use in speech is based on providing reliable information in 

the  format  of  facts,  statistics,  and  any  other  reliable  arguments.  In  victory 

speech, the introduction of logos is not common, since the communicative goal 

is  fundamentally  different  from  the  pre-election  speech  and  is  aimed  at 

appealing  to  emotions,  rather  than  manipulating  them  in  order  to  achieve  the 

 
108 

necessary  results.  There  are only two examples of its application in the victory 

speech delivered by Barack Obama: 

-  “...to  meet  the  challenges  we  can  only  solve  together  –  reducing  our 

deficit,  reforming  our  tax  code,  fixing  our  immigration  system,  freeing 

ourselves from foreign oil.” 

-  “Democracy in a nation of 300 million…” 

The  use  of  kairos  is  also  worth  paying  attention  to.  Its  widespread 

employment  in  victory  speeches  is  not  common,  but  Barack  Obama  still 

demonstrates  excellent  skills  in  creating  a  context  for  using  this  technique. 

Some examples of its use are the following: 

“I believe we can seize this future together…” 

“We've got more work to do.” 

“You can make it here in America if you're willing to try.” 

Pre-election speech by Donald John Trump (2024)  

-  Historical context: 

In  2024,  when  Donald  Trump  delivered  his  speech  at  the  Republican 

National  Convention,  the  United  States  was  experiencing  a  period  marked  by 

intense political, social, and economic challenges. The society remained sharply 

divided  in  terms  of  the  political  viewpoints  following  the  2020  presidential 

election,  which  Joe  Biden  won.  This polarisation was influenced by the events 

of January 6, 2021, when Trump supporters violently stormed the U.S. Capitol. 

Their  goal  was  to  stop  Congress  from  certifying  Biden’s  victory by disrupting 

the  session  counting  the  electoral  votes.  The  attack  resulted  in  the  growing 

tension  between  political  parties and raised serious concerns about the stability 

of American democracy. 

In  addition  to  this,  Donald  Trump  was  involved  in  multiple  legal 

investigations  related  to  his  possible  efforts  to  change  the  2020  election 

 
 
 
109 

outcome.  The  House  of  Representatives  charged  Trump  with  encouraging  the 

attack,  but  the  Senate  acquitted  him,  intensifying  partisan  divisions.  The 

political  environment  was  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  Trump  was 

running  for  president  again,  despite  these  legal  issues.  The  2024  campaign 

period  saw  two  assassination attempts against Trump, highlighting the extreme 

hostility present in the political environment. 

Another  important  political  factor  is  that  President  Joe  Biden,  who  was 

initially  strived  to  be re-elected, withdrew after a poor debate performance and 

concerns about his health. Vice President Kamala Harris became the Democratic 

nominee.  On  the  Republican  side,  Trump  proposed  the  nomination  with  JD 

Vance as his running mate.  

As for the social domain, while challenges remained, there were efforts to 

improve  living  and  working  conditions. The Biden administration continued to 

expand access to healthcare and undertake incentives to fight the HIV epidemic, 

as  well  as  education  and  social  security  benefits,  aiming  to support vulnerable 

groups  of  people.  Besides  that,  Biden  signed  Executive  Order  13988,  which 

required  all  federal  agencies  to  extend  existing  non-discrimination  protections 

based on sex to include sexual orientation and gender identity.  

Key  issues  during  the  campaign  included  immigration  control  and 

enhanced  criminal  level,  economic  crises  (i.e.  high  tax  code,  inflation  rates, 

rising  energy  and oil prices), and foreign conflicts such as the conflict between 

Ukraine  and  Russia  and  tensions  in  the  Middle  East  and  China.  The  midterm 

elections  earlier  that  year  resulted in Republicans regaining control of both the 

House  of  Representatives  and  the  Senate,  shifting  the  balance  of  power  in 

Congress. 

-  Topics emphasised in the message (speech): 

As  it  has  been  already  highlighted  the  topics  covered  in  the  speech  are 

highly  dependent  on  the  communicative goals of the pre-election speeches and 

the  events  happening  in  the  country  at  that  moment.  A  unique  feature  of  this 

 
110 

particular speech is its immediate context – Trump is addressing the nation with 

his  policies  just  a  few  days  after  surviving  an  assassination  attempt,  which 

becomes  one  of  the  central  topics  that  is  either  expressed  explicitly  or  framed 

with the use of the linguistic tools throughout the whole utterance.  

The  next  major  messages  that  stand  out  in  the  campaign  are  the idea of 

‘healing’  the  country  and the criticism of Joe Biden’s presidency. A significant 

portion  of  the  speech  focuses  on  the  core  American  principles  and  beliefs, 

including  patriotism,  faith  in  God,  and  collective  courage.  Finally,  Trump 

explicitly  frames  the  2024  election  as  a  mission  to “make America successful, 

safe, free and great again,” directly invoking the core MAGA slogan, as well as 

his control policies over illegal immigrants.  

-  Cultural references and culturally-loaded linguistic units: 

In his speech, Donald Trump also implements a wide variety of linguistic 

units  that  enhance  its  cultural  load,  making  it  more  emotional  and  persuasive. 

The  president  employs  allusions  as  the  main  tool  to  frame  cultural  ideologies 

that  help  him  express  his  standpoints,  outline  future  policies  and  implicitly 

underline their significance. The following examples can be cited:  

1.  Assassination attempt: 

-  “Not supposed to be here;” 

-  “the assassination attempt at my rally on Saturday;” 

-  “I stand before you in this arena only by the grace of almighty God.” 

These references are the important part of Trump’s speech which are employed 

very  frequently   not  only  to  appeal  to  a  serious  personal  danger  and  highlight 

the  significance  of  the  moment  of  this  interaction  between  him  and  the 

audience,  but  also  frame  the  idea  of  courage  and  loyalty  of  his  supportence, 

reinforcing  the  themes  of  heroism  and  solidarity  promoted  in  his  election 

campaign.  Additionally,  the  examination  of  the  narrative’s  structure  of  this 

speech has revealed that Trump deliberately and most extensively alluded to this 

 
 
 
111 

attack  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  utterance.  This  framing  makes  a 

powerful  impact  on  the  perception  of  the  overall  message,  by  humanising  the 

speaker, dramatising the election efforts and the ‘price’ of these efforts, and also 

denoting his survival as ‘providential.’ 

2.  Existing country’s issues: 

-  “The discord and division in our society must be healed;” 

-  “I am running to be president for all of America, not half of America;” 

-  “Inflation  has  wiped  out  the  life  savings  of  our  citizens , and forced the 

middle class into a state of depression and despair.” 

By referencing these problems, Donald Trump frames the upcoming election as 

a  crucial  moment  for  solving  them.  As  a  future  leader,  he  attempts  to 

demonstrate the relevance of the promised policies by reinforcing his statements 

with the current cultural issues that resonate with the citizens of the country and 

thus enhance their reliability. Further on, it is crucial to emphasise that the most 

vivid issue that is referenced in the speech relates to the economic indicators of 

the country   (i.e. tax code, increased inflation rate, oil and energy sources, small 

businesses’  problems,  and  others),  reflecting  Trump’s  personal  background,  in 

particular his career as a businessman.  

3.  Criticism of Joe Biden’s administration: 

-  “The  Democrat  party  should  immediately  stop  weaponizing  the  justice 

system;” 

-  “We  must  first  rescue  our  nation  from  failed  and  even  incompetent 

leadership” 

-  “The  current  administration  terminated  every  single  one  of  those  great 

Trump policies.” 

Donald  Trump’s  frequent  allusions  to  Joe  Biden’s  presidency  and  his  own 

policies  that  he  claims  were  “devastated”  or  “reversed”  by  the  Biden 

administration  are  an  intentional  and  strategic  rhetorical  device  in  his  speech. 

Many  of  Trump’s  supporters  have  a  negative  attitude  towards  the  direction  of 

 
112 

the  country  under  Biden.  By  repeatedly  referencing  Biden’s  presidency  in 

negative terms and portraying himself as the only candidate capable of changing 

current  problems,  the  speaker  manipulates  the  voters,  reinforcing  the  sense  of 

shared purpose and viewpoints. 

4.  ‘Make America Great Again’ Movement: 

-  “...  how to make America successful, safe, free and great again;” 

-  “He’s  going  to be a great vice president, he’s going to be great. He’ll be 

with this country and with this movement;” 

-  “Under our leadership, the United States will be respected again.” 

This is a separate important group of references that are implemented by Donald 

Trump  throughout  the  speech  to  amplify  the  identity  of  his  campaign.  It  is 

necessary  to  point  out  that  MAGA  is  not  just  a  slogan,  it  is  a  central  rallying 

policy  of  Trump’s  political  movement  since  2016.  The  slogan  itself  is  in  the 

majority  of  cases  transformed  and  does  not  represent  the  initial  sounding,  but 

rather hidden implications bound in the forms of consonant phrases that foster a 

sense  of  belonging  and  collective  responsibility.  What  is  more,  such  powerful 

slogans  have a special impact on the minds of the audience during the times of 

crises  or  terrifying  events  (e.g.,  successive  assimilation  attacks),  since  the 

distinctive  feature  of  all  slogans  is  the  ability  to  produce  a  memorable  and 

highly emotional effect. 

5.  Other major policies of the campaign: 

-  “...  the  great  job  my  administration  did  on  immigration  at  the  southern 

border;” 

-  “We will drill, baby, drill;” 

-  “Because they’re taking the jobs from our Black population, our Hispanic 

population.” 

Trump’s use of allusions in these policy statements is strategic and manipulative 

in  the  sense  that  it  simplifies  complex  concepts,  evokes  strong  emotions,  and 

frames debates in ways that favor his candidacy. Among the references that fall 

 
113 

into  this  category,  the  allusions  to  his  past  and  current  plans  to  increase  the 

control  over  the  illegal  immigrants  and  establish  restrictions  on their ability to 

take over the job and college places. These policies are also interrelated with the 

economic agenda that is put emphasis on in Trump’s campaign.  

Next,  phraseological  units  that  have  been  identified  in  the  speech  are 

worth paying attention to: 

-  “I  am  a  great  believer  in  luck,  and  I  find  the  harder  I  work,  the more I 

have of it;” 

-  “We were beating every country, including China, by leaps and bounds;” 

-  “Third  world  countries  would  fight  with  sticks  and  stones  not to let this 

happen.” 

The  number  of  the  utilised  set  or  idiomatic  expressions  is  quite  high  in  the 

analysed speech, making it even more culturally-loaded. As for the first phrase, 

it  is  one  of  the  most  peculiar  examples  of  their  use,  since  it  represents  a 

well-known  American  saying,  often  attributed  to  Thomas  Jefferson  and 

sometimes  to  other  famous  figures,  that  is  utilised  in  order  to  evoke  the 

emotions  and  engage  the  audience  through  the  use  of  a  familiar  and  resonant 

language. The last two examples illustrate the use of idioms implemented in the 

context of the utterance with the same purpose of appealing to the audience and 

affecting their perception.  

Further  on,  the  analysis  has  shown  that  Donald  Trump  utilised  a  great 

number  of  conceptual  metaphors  and  certain  metonymic  expressions that are 

closely  intertwined  with  the  social  and  cultural  background  context.  For 

instance: 

-  “Our cities are flooded with illegal aliens;” 

-  “We will lead America to new heights of greatness” 

-  “Americans are being squeezed out of the labor force.” 

The examples demonstrate a deliberate use of metaphor to frame one concept in 

terms  of  another.  In  the  framework  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach,  these 

 
 
 
114 

devices  are  of  particular  importance  to  be  analysed,  since  their  peculiarity  is 

their  dependence  on  the  cultural  context.  A  person  that  is  isolated  from  that 

culture can miss the implied figurative meaning of this stylistic device.  

Among the most vivid examples of the use of culture-specific metonymy 

and  its  special  cases  (i.e.  antonomasia,  synecdoche),  the following instances 

can be outlined: 

-  “They were serious Trumpsters;” 

-  “...  because of this very foolish administration” 

-  “It’s just some of the fools on top” 

Regarding the functions of these devices in Trump’s speech, they also intensify 

the  emotional density of the speech. In this context, they serve as the tools that 

personalise  political  identities,  sharpen  distinctions  between  supporters  and 

opponents,  and  present  the  concepts  or  people  being  described  in  the  desired 

way.  

Finally,  hyperbole  as  a  frequently  employed  stylistic  device  appears  to 

have  cultural  connotations  or  references  in  the  context  of  Donald  Trump’s 

pre-election  speech.  By  presenting  his  past  political  experiences,  as  well  as 

future  achievements  and  policies  as  ‘unprecedented,’  the  speaker  intents  to 

convince the audience and make an impactful emotional appeal: 

-  “We  will  lead  America  to  new  heights  of  greatness  like  the  world  has 

never seen before;” 

-  “We  had  an  economy  the  likes  of  which  nobody,  no  nation  had  ever 

seen;” 

-  “The entire world is pouring into our country.” 

In  these  cases,  hyperboles  are  indeed  culture-specific  as  they  are  used  to 

exaggerate  particular  concepts  relevant only in the framework of this country’s 

features.  For  instance,  the  first  example  is  a  hyperbole  and  allusion  to  the 

MAGA  Movement  at  once,  which  in  combination  are  utilised  in  order  to 

 
 
 
115 

manipulate the listeners’ perception by making the future promises seem greater 

or problems more severe, as in the last two examples. 

-  Emotional density of the speech:  

Donald John Trump makes wide use of not only rhetorical strategies, but also 

parcellation  in  order  to  gain  a specific emotional impact on the audience. The 

latter  is  considered  to  be  an  intentional  division  of  one  message  into  several 

compositional elements, and is traditionally perceived by listeners as a means of 

escalating tension, which makes the listener more receptive. The combination of 

these  two  approaches  leads  to the fact that the speaker can enhance the overall 

emotional and manipulative impact. Revealing the essence of this interaction, it 

is relevant to consider its application in Donald Trump's pre-election speech. 

The  first  aspect  to  be  analyzed  in  relation  to  parcellation  is  pathos,  which  is 

originally  considered as an appeal to emotions and is aimed at establishing this 

kind  of  relationship  between  the  speaker  and  the  audience.  The  most  striking 

examples of this combination are the following: 

-  “I would not be here tonight. We would not be together.” 

-  “I’m not supposed to be here tonight. Not supposed to be here.” 

-  “Fight, fight, fight.” 

All three of the above-mentioned examples have a common theme, namely, they 

reveal the essence and consequences of the attack on Donald Trump during one 

of  his  pre-election  campaigns  in  Butler, Pennsylvania. Despite the fact that the 

events described have a strong emotional density (since at that moment not only 

the  President  got  injured,  but also one of the soldiers who defended him died), 

the  speaker  decides  to  strengthen  it  by  parcellation.  In  the  first  two  examples, 

one  tactic  is  used  to  represent  a  hypothetical  development  of  events  where 

Donald John Trump would not be saved. The third example has the format of a 

slogan  and  is  not  only  an  appeal  to  emotions,  but  also  a  metaphorical  call  to 

action. Overall, the use of a combination of pathos and parcellation has a strong 

 
116 

influence  on  the  audience  and  predisposes  it  to  a  possible  increase  in  tension, 

which is what Donald Trump uses. 

The next rhetorical strategy with which parcellation interacts is ethos, the 

use  of  which is aimed at provoking the sense of trust, credibility, and authority 

to the speaker. Its use is justified by the necessity to predispose the audience for 

further  manipulation.  The  most  prominent  examples that demonstrate this kind 

of  combination  in  the  pre-election  speech  of  the  45th  President  of  the  United 

States are the following: 

-  “ We will press forward, and together, we will win, win, win.” 

-  “And we will do it right. We’re going to do it right.” 

-  “...I  will  never,  ever  let  you  down.  I  promise  that.  I  will  never  let  you 

down” 

In  the  case  of  these  three  demonstrations  of  ethos  and  parcellation,  Donald 

Trump uses different communicative tactics. In the first example, the focus is on 

unifying  the  entire  nation  with  the  help  of  the  pronoun  "we",  as  well  as 

emphasizing  that  they  cannot  give  up  and  have  to  go  forward  in  order to win, 

but  do  it  together.  It  is  precisely  because of the parcelling of a single idea into 

several  combinational  units  that  this  sentence  provokes  feelings  of  trust  and 

reliability. In the second example, all citizens are also united by a pronoun, even 

though the goal is not victory, but the correctness of future decisions. The use of 

two  grammatical  constructions  in subsequent sentences with the same message 

enhances the manipulative effect. The last third example utilises a new tactic of 

setting  promises,  which  had  not  previously  been  used  in  the  speech  by  this 

speaker.  This  structure  of  splitting  up  an  idea  and  then  repeating it serves as a 

reinforcement for establishing a trusting relationship with the audience. Overall, 

all three sentences fully reveal the practical significance of using a combination 

of  ethos  and  parcellation,  and  also  demonstrate  their  own  peculiarities,  which 

are  expressed  in such aspects as lexical repetition and a variety of grammatical 

structures. 

 
117 

To  consider  the  following  rhetorical  strategy,  namely  logos,  it  is 

important  to  state  that  its  use  carries  a  strong  semantic  load,  which  in  some 

cases can slow down the process of perception and processing of information. In 

addition, an extensive context is required for proper decoding of such a device. 

For  this  reason,  the  logo  is  not  widely  used  in  Donald  Trump's  pre-election 

speech  and  is  not  compatible  with  the  parcellation.  Some  of  the  most  striking 

manifestations  of  this  technique  within  the  framework  of  the  analyzed 

pre-election  speech  conveyed  by  Donald  Trump  during his second presidential 

race are the following: 

-  “We defeated 100 percent of ISIS in Syria and Iraq…” 

-  “In El Salvador, murders are down 70 percent.” 

-  “One  hundred  and  seven  percent  of  those  jobs  are  taken  by  illegal 

aliens.” 

Based  on  these  three  examples,  the  idea  that  logos  requires  additional 

information  in  order  to  properly  understand  and  interpret  the  message  can  be 

emphasised.  Thus,  in  the  first  sentence,  the  use  of  numeric  data  is  aimed  at 

supporting the message that the US army is strong enough to defeat even such a 

historically  severe  opponent.  In  the  second  case,  the  percentage  is  also  given, 

and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  speaker  points  out  how  the  number  of 

murders has decreased, rather than emphasizing how much it is compared to last 

year.  It  can  also  be  considered  as  a  certain  manipulative  tactic  and  framing of 

the  transmitted  information.  The  third  sentence is presented in the context of a 

discussion  of  how  the  large  influx  of  immigrants  into  the  country  affects  the 

basic ability of local residents to obtain decent jobs. The indication of statistical 

data  once  again  underlines  its  effectiveness  in  the  context  of  its  impact  on  a 

wide  audience.  Overall,  even  though  all  three  examples  use  the  same tactic of 

predisposing  and  further  manipulating  the  audience,  this  numerical  approach 

remains effective in the context of this speech. 

 
118 

The  use  of  the  additional  rhetorical  strategy,  namely  kairos,  in 

combination  with  parcellation  is  not  widely  used  in  Donald  Trump's 

pre-election speech. This is due to the fact that this technique is a call to action 

and,  like  logos,  requires  proper  timing,  context,  and  an  explicitly  established 

communicative  goal.  Nevertheless,  there  are  still  several  representative 

examples of this combination that are to be considered: 

-  “With great humility, I am asking you to be excited about the future of our 

country. Be excited. Be excited.” 

-  “...they want to raise your taxes four times. Think of it.” 

-  “I want your vote. We’re going to make our country great again.” 

Kairos  is  a  fairly  strong  rhetorical  strategy,  the  excessive  use  of  which  only 

burdens  the  text. Based on the examples mentioned above, it can be stated that 

its  use  is  not  hidden  and  is  traditionally  found  at  the  end  of  a  sentence.  It  is 

interesting  to  note  that  in  the  first  sentence,  Donald  Trump  twice  repeats  the 

phrase  (call  to  action),  which  is  also  used  in  describing  the  context  and 

preparing  the  audience.  This  can  be  fully  considered  as  a  manifestation  of 

parcellation  and  deliberate  reinforcement  of  manipulative  tactics.  The  second 

example  utilises  a  different  approach, namely that the speaker acts as a mentor 

who  does  not  openly  create  opposition,  but  calls  for  action  in  relation  to  the 

issue.  At  the  same  time,  the  latter  is syntactically highlighted, which, as in the 

first  case,  is  a  demonstration  of the combination of kairos with parcellation. In 

the  third  case,  the  President  directly  voices  the  set  communication  task,  and 

only then gives an explanation in the form of a promise to make America great 

again.  Such  manipulative  tactics  are  not  traditional  in use, but they are no less 

effective.  In  general,  the  presence  of  ideological  diversity  and  strengthening it 

by combining two tools to influence the audience has an effective application in 

Donald Trump's election speech. 

 
119 

Victory speech by Donald John Trump (2024) 

-  Topics emphasised in the message (speech): 

To start with, it is crucial to note that Donald Trump, like other speakers, 

uses  topics  that  were presented in the pre-election speech and then frames it in 

accordance with the structure of the victory speech. The 45th and 47th President 

of  the  United  States,  in  order  to  achieve  the set communicative goals, touched 

upon  important  topics  of  the  development  of  the  country's  future  and  the 

measures that will be taken for this. It is essential to outline that the speaker also 

has  a  section  where  he  thanks  all  those  who  supported  him  throughout  the 

presidential  race.  Moreover,  Donald  Trump  also  gives  the  floor  to  his  vice 

president,  JD  Vance.  Based  on  all  of  the  above-mentioned,  the  following 

thematic units can be identified in the victory speech under study: 

1.  Achievements and results of the pre-election campaign; 

2.  Gratitude to the family, the party and the citizens; 

3.  A promising new future for the country; 

4.  Make America Great Again (MAGA). 

Based  on  the  fact  that  all  three  presidents  (whose speeches are analysed 

within  this  study)  mention the topics of already closed pre-election campaigns, 

plans for the development of the country, and also express wide gratitude to all 

the  people  involved  in  their  victory,  it  is  possible to conclude that they are the 

fundamental  section  in  the  victory  speech.  It  also  implies  their  great 

manipulative  nature,  which  each  speaker  adapts  to  their  needs.  Regarding  the 

latter  topic,  namely  the  MAGA  movement,  Donald  Trump's  emphasis  on  it  is 

logical,  since this slogan has been used by the politician since the beginning of 

his first pre-election campaign in 2015. Every mention of it is considered to be a 

culturally-loaded unit. 

-  Cultural references and culturally-loaded linguistic units: 

 
 
120 

In revealing the main message of his victory speech, Donald Trump used 

a  large  number  of  cultural  references  to  his  last  pre-election  campaign  and 

presidential  term.  This  makes  speech  broader  and  more  emotionally  complex, 

since in order to decode it, it is necessary not only to share cultural background, 

but  also 

to  have  narrowly  focused  knowledge.  Overall, 

the  use  of 

culturally-loaded  units  is  extensive.  Some  examples  of  their  use  are  the 

following: 

1.  Cultural references: 

-  “We also have won the popular vote.” 

-  “.... all won by the MAGA movement.” 

-  “... we'll be keeping control of the House of Representatives” 

2.  Phraseological units: 

-  “This will truly be the golden age of America.” 

-  “Beautiful inside and out” 

-  “... the only guy I've ever seen who really looks forward to it.” 

3.  Metonymy: 

-  “...despite all the frustrations of Washington…” 

-  “...who turned out at our rallies and crowded along a rope line…” 

-  “... the task of perfecting our union.” 

-  Emotional density of the speech: 

In  his  victory  speech,  Donald  John  Trump  continues the widespread use 

of rhetorical strategies. The first rhetorical strategy to be analysed is pathos, the 

use  of  which  is  conditioned  by  exceptional  emotionality  aimed  at  creating  a 

certain  connection  between  the  speaker  and the audience. The most practically 

significant  examples  within  the  framework  of  Donald  Trump's  victory  speech 

are the following: 

-  “This was a movement like nobody's ever seen before.” 

-  “We have a country that needs help, and it needs help very badly.” 

 
 
121 

-  “We made history for a reason tonight, and the reason is going to be just 

that.” 

The second rhetorical strategy that should be explored as part of a victory 

speech  is  ethos.  The  use  of  this  technique  is  traditionally  done  to  establish  a 

certain  connection  by  creating  a  sense  of  trust,  authority  and  persuasiveness 

towards  the  speaker,  in  this  case  the  president.  Some  of  the  examples  from 

Donald Trump's victory speech are the following: 

-  “  I  will fight for you, for your family and your future. Every single day I 

will be fighting for …” 

-  “I  will  not  rest  until  we  have  delivered  the  strong,  safe  and  prosperous 

America.” 

-  “I will govern by a simple motto: promises made, promises kept.” 

This  is  the  end  of  the  rhetorical  strategies  used  by  Donald Trump in his 

victory speech. Such a lack of logos and kairos can be justified by the fact that 

the communicative task of this type of discourse does not imply the presence of 

evidence-based arguments, and a call to action is optional. 

To  conclude,  a  comprehensive  content  analysis  of  the  speeches  through 

the  framework  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach  has  demonstrated  the 

extensive  use  of  culturally-loaded  linguistic  units  and  rhetorical  strategies  that 

intensify  the  overall  expressiveness,  emotionality  and  manipulative  impacts  of 

the utterances and reflect the unique peculiarities of the speakers’ rhetoric.  It is 

essential  to  specify  that  this  section  has  focused  on the clarification of various 

linguistic  means  with  the  implied  cultural  connotations,  which  are  showcased 

using  an equal number of examples that illustrate their functions. However, the 

given research carries out a full-fledged examination of the presented linguistic 

and rhetorical peculiarities in the form of the tables and graphs (see Appendix.), 

featuring  the  categories,  number  of  occurrences,  and  all  the  examples  of  their 

use in the pre-election and victory speeches of George Bush, Barack Obama and 

Donald Trump.  

 
122 

2.4 Comparative Analysis. 

Having  conducted  an  in-depth  content  analysis  of  the  pre-election  and 

victory  speeches  by  Donald  John  Trump,  Barack  Hussein  Obama,  and George 

Walker  Bush,  using  the  framework  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach  and the 

methods  applied  in  this  study,  it is now possible to compare the analysed units 

on  the  basis  of  the  outlined  parameters  (see  Section  2.1). This chapter focuses 

on  the  identification  of  key  differences  in  the  use  of  culturally-  and 

emotionally-loaded linguistic units by three presidents that have distinct cultural 

and  personal  backgrounds.  Taking  that  into  consideration,  the  comparative 

analysis  in  this  research aims to reveal in what ways cultural backgrounds (see 

their  descriptions  in  Appendix.)  of  the  speakers  influenced  their  linguistic 

choices within their political messages.  

In  addition,  the  second  chosen  parameter  for  comparison,  namely,  the 

reflection  of  the  contrast  between  two  types  of  speeches  that  have  been 

examined  through  the  lens  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach  is  also  to  be 

discussed.  Both  criteria  are  essential  for the study since they correspond to the 

primary  research  questions  and  hypotheses  of  the  study.  In  particular,  the 

questions  concerning,  first  of  all,  whether  the  speeches reflect the peculiarities 

of  the  speaker  as  a  representative  of  a  certain  culture  and  unique  background 

through the use of linguistic means, and, second of all, whether these linguistic 

means vary depending on the type and of the presidential speeches. 

  It  is  crucial  to  mention  that  all  the  findings  provided in this section are 

based  on  the  preliminary,  all-encompassing  critical  discourse  and  quantitative 

content  analyses  that  are  provided  in  their  full  format  in  the  Appendix  of  the 

study  in  the forms of the tables featuring all identified examples of the devices 

utilised  by  the  speakers,  their  number  of  occurrences, graphs that visualise the 

results,  and  two  subsequent  comparative  tables  that  concentrate  on  the 

 
123 

quantified  percentages 

that  facilitate 

the  analysis  of 

the  most  vivid, 

representative features. 

First,  the  varieties  in  the  linguistic  choices  of the presidents are to be 

presented. As far as the linguistic and cultural analytical approach is concerned, 

socio-cultural  backgrounds  of  the  speakers  have  a  direct  impact  on  their 

mindsets  and  the  language  they  use.  The  latter  can  be  manifested  on  the 

different levels, including the lexical and syntactic layers of the speech, each of 

which  has  been  analysed  to  define  the  overall  emotional  density  and 

manipulativeness of the effects produced by the utterances.  

At  the  lexical  level,  the  analysis  shows  that  all  three  presidents 

extensively  utilised  various  figures  of  speech,  many  of  which  are  indeed 

culturally-loaded.  Allusions,  as  one  of  the  most prominent devices embodying 

cultural connotations, are the most frequent and powerful tools employed by the 

presidents, with George Bush standing out across the pre-election speeches and 

Barack Obama within the victory ones.  

These  tendencies  are  indeed  impacted  by the socio-cultural contexts and 

backgrounds of the speakers – George Bush’s most references are related either 

to  the  terrorist  attacks  that  were  going  on  during  his  first  presidency  or  his 

underlying  traditional  and  conservative  values  (e.g.,  core  principles  of  family 

and  faith,  or  the  opposing  views  towards  same-sex  marriage)  the  allusion  to 

which  is  explained  by the fact that he comes from a prominent political family 

with  a  strong  Republican  standpoints.  His  father,  George  H.W.  Bush  was  the 

41st  president  of  the  United  States  and  a  figure  associated  with  conservative 

values. In addition to that, the fact that Bush was born and raised in Texas, one 

of  the  South  American  states  with  distinct  strictness  towards  many  social 

aspects,  also  contributes  to  the  understanding  of the logic behind the linguistic 

choices made in his political addresses.  

Despite  the  fact  that  both  George  Bush  and  Barack  Obama  employed 

almost  equal  numbers  of  allusions  to  frame  certain  ideologies  (27.7%  against 

 
124 

30,6 respectively in the sum of two speeches), their essence is absolutely not the 

same.  Barack  Obama, as a representative of the Democrat party and absolutely 

different cultural background, on the contrary, uses various linguistic techniques 

to  allude  to  principles  of  inclusivity,  change,  freedom of choice, and a broader 

social  justice perspective. As the first African American president, Obama puts 

greater  emphasis  on  the  rights  of  minorities  and  calls  to  overcome  the 

discrimination  of  any  kind, which directly echoes his multicultural background 

(Kenyan father, American mother), upbringing in diverse cultural environments 

(Indonesia,  Kenya,  the  United  States),  and  his  experience  as  a  community 

organizer.  

As  for  Donald  Trump’s  use  of  culture-specific  references,  it  is  worth 

noting  that  their  overall  sum  constitutes  18.8%  overall,  which  stands  behind a 

close percentage of this device’s utilisation by the other two presidents. Despite 

this  variation,  the  similarity  of  the  topics  alluded  to  has  been  identified  in  his 

and  George  Bush’s  speeches.  Firstly,  it  allows  one  to draw the conclusion that 

belonging  to  a  particular  party greatly influences the rhetoric and manipulative 

techniques  employed  by the speakers. All the speakers have used allusions and 

other  culture-specific  lexical  units  to  mobilise  the  votes  towards  their  parties 

and  policies  and  debate  the  opposing  views.  Secondly,  it  also  reflects  the 

cultural  experiences  of  the  speaker.  Trump’s  commitment  to  the  Republican 

viewpoints  that  are  transmitted  through  the  use  of  allusions,  conceptual 

metaphors,  and  other  means, is also the characteristic feature of his upbringing 

in   a  bustling,  competitive  urban  setting  and  his  deal-making  skills  as  an 

influential  businessman.  His  principles  concentrate  on  economic  nationalism, 

law,  order,  and  cultural  conservatism,  often  framed  in  terms  of  protecting 

American jobs and identity against globalisation and immigration. 

Another peculiar distinction that is seen in the lexical devices, is Trump’s 

extensive  utilisation  of  hyperbole  and  intensifiers  in  his  speech  (15.6  %  and 

22.8 % respectively overall) in comparison to Bush and Obama (10.7 % and 2.8 

 
125 

%  against  8.9  % and 4.4 % respectively). The analysis of Trump’s pre-election 

speech revealed 56 instances of the use of such intensifiers, as ‘really,’ ‘totally,’ 

‘extremely,’  and  ‘very’  that  are  in  some cases presented in a combination with 

incomplete  sentences  (i.e.  ellipsis)  that  make  some  of  the  statements  seem 

informal.  Both  Bush  and  Obama,  on  the  contrary,  coming  from  more 

conventional  political  and  academic  backgrounds,  have just a few examples of 

their use.  

Such  a  great  difference  indicates  a  certain  tendency  concerning  the 

correlation of the career and education paths of the speakers and their rhetorical 

tactics.  Trump’s  socio-cultural  background  as  a  New  York  businessman  and 

reality  TV  personality  fostered  a  communication  style  that  is  sometimes  not 

very  formal,  but  emphatic,  and  designed  to  capture  attention  quickly.  In  their 

speeches,  Barack  Obama  and  George  Bush  tend  to  use  metaphors  and 

phraseological  units  more  than  the  above  mentioned  expressive  and  stylistic 

means.  Using  the  sophisticated  figurative  comparisons  and  applying  familiar 

fixed  expressions  to  their  ideas,  they  promote  ideas  more  subtly,  while  also 

evoking the emotions in the minds of the audience.  

The  next  features  that  are  worth  contrasting  as  they  also  reflect  the 

cultural  peculiarities  of  the  presidents  are  the  use  of  irony  and  rhetorical 

questions. In general, both of the devices are considered to be the indicators of 

the  informal  tone  or register of the speech. However, as it has been clarified in 

the theoretical part of the research, in political discourse they can function as the 

tools  to  oppose  someone’s  ideologies  and  to  engage  or  distract  the  audience. 

Donald  Trump,  who  has  an  economic  background compared to George Bush’s 

military  and  political  experiences  and  Barack  Obama’s  interconnection  with 

Law and Politics studies and practices, utilised both of the devices the most. It is 

noteworthy  that  in  almost all the cases of the utilisation of irony and rhetorical 

questions, Trump aims at positioning himself as an ‘outsider’ fighting against a 

corrupt  establishment  and explicitly undermining the opponents. As for Barack 

 
126 

Obama  and  George  Bush,  their  few  instances  of  the  use  of  these  techniques 

rather demonstrate the intentional desire to engage the audience and make them 

think of the proposed policies.  

At  the  syntactic 

level,  all  presidents  employ  various  types  of 

grammatical  repetition  and  parallel  constructions to structure the ideas in a 

more efficient way. The most important aspect that is worth highlighting at this 

layer  is  that  there  is  a  visible  difference  between  the  narrative  techniques  of 

these three speakers. While George Bush and Barack Obama implement a great 

number  of  parallel  constructions  and  antithesis  to  frame  their  ideas  and  make 

them  more  emotionally  powerful,  Donald  Trump’s  distinct  feature  is  a 

numerous  utilisation  of  short,  incomplete,  parcellated sentences throughout the 

speech. Listening to the oral formats of the utterances, this peculiarity is the first 

to be noticed, since the intonation patterns utilised in the case of Trump’s speech 

that  is  full  of  ellipsis,  deliberate  parcellated  pauses,  and  inversion  are  very 

different  from  the  long  passages  of  identical  and  sometimes quite complicated 

grammatical structures frequently employed by Obama and Bush.  

Both  techniques  contribute  to  the  expressive,  emotive  and  phonological 

power  of  the  utterances  but  represent  different  narrative  and  storytelling 

methods.  On  the  one  hand, Trump’s syntactic structures aim to be spontaneous 

and  relatable,   which  contrasts  with  formal  political  oratory,  making  his 

speeches accessible and memorable. George Bush’s parallel structures almost in 

every  extract  of  his  speech, on the other hand, are also of particular usefulness 

in  the  formal  addresses  of  the  political  nominee  as they present the speaker as 

highly  literate  and  authoritative  and  create  balanced  and  elevate  arguments. 

Barack  Obama’s use of parallel constructions is also very extensive, but what 

is especially noteworthy, parallelism in his speeches is frequently manifested in 

the  form  of  antithesis,  the  biggest  number  of  which  has  been  identified  in  his 

utterance  (7.8  %  against  Bush’s  and  Trump’s  5.6  %  and  3.6  %  respectively). 

Obama utilised antithesis to clearly outline the differences between his policies 

 
127 

and those of his main political opponent, Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee 

in  the  2012  presidential  election.  Its  use  is  also  explained  by  the  values 

influenced  by  his  socio-cultural  background  that  drive  his  campaign  and  that 

vary from the opponent’s side.  

To  sum  up  the  comparison  of  the  linguistic  peculiarities  of  three 

representatives  of  distinct  backgrounds,  it  is  worth  stating  that  despite  the 

differences  in  views  and  experiences  of  the  speakers,  all  the  speeches  are 

marked  with  the  broad  use  of  units  that  reflect  the  linguistic  and  cultural 

identities of the speakers. However, the comparative analysis carried out relying 

on  the  principles  of  linguistic  and  cultural  approach  shows  clear  tendencies in 

the use of certain techniques by the speakers that are influenced by their cultural 

perspectives.  

Regarding  the  second  parameter  for  comparison,  it  is  aimed  at 

revealing  the  characteristic  features  of  two  different  communicative  situations 

that  are  under  the  analysis  of  this  study.  Political  utterances  are  inherently 

shaped  by  their  communicative  context  and  goals.  In  the  realm  of presidential 

addresses, pre-election and victory speeches represent two distinct genres, each 

serving unique purposes: the former aims to persuade and manipulate, while the 

latter  is  used  to  celebrate  inauguration  by  highlighting  shared  achievement,  as 

well as to unify and inspire the audience. 

One  of  the  most  notable  distinctions  between  pre-election  and  victory 

speeches  is  the  frequency  and  function  of  emotional  and  evaluative  devices, 

such  as  epithets,  intensifiers,  and  pathos.  In  victory  speeches,  the  use  of 

epithets increases significantly across all speakers (e.g., from 11.4% to 19.8% in 

Trump’s  speeches).  Similarly,  the  proportion  of  the  appeal  to  emotion strategy 

rises in the victory speeches, most prominently in Bush’s (from 5.4% to 15.2%) 

and  Trump’s  (from  3.9%  to  9.2%)  utterances.  This  shift  reflects  the 

communicative  goal  of  victory  speeches  –  to  evoke  collective pride, gratitude, 

and unity after electoral success.  

 
128 

Further  on,  victory  speeches  also  contain  a  greater  number  of  syntactic 

stylistic  devices,  in  particular,  parallelism  and  anaphora.  For  instance, 

Obama’s  use  of  parallelism  increases  from  8.1%  in  pre-election  speeches  to 

12.1%  in  victory  speeches,  while  anaphora  remains  consistently  high.  These 

devices  contribute  to  the  rhythmic  and  memorable quality of victory speeches, 

while  serving  primarily  to  construct  persuasive  arguments  and  express  future 

promises in the pre-election ones. 

However,  devices  associated  with  logical  reasoning  and  persuasion  are 

more  prevalent  in  the  pre-election  speeches.  For  example,  the  use  of  logos  is 

generally  higher  in  pre-election speeches (e.g.,   2.3% against 0.6% in Obama’s 

victory  speech), as well as allusions (e.g.   9.6% against 6% in Trump’s victory 

speech)  that  are more powerful in the framework of election campaigns, where 

they are strategically used to implicitly frame ideologies and the significance of 

their potential leadership, hence influencing the perception of the audience.  

Metaphors  show  a  notable  shift  in  usage  patterns,  with  Obama 

substantially increasing his metaphorical expressions from pre-election (10.5%) 

to  victory  speeches  (17.9%),  while  Trump  demonstrates  the  opposite tendency 

(7.4% to 4.6%). These shifts highlight   that metaphors serve different functions 

in  these  contexts: in victory speeches, they help convey unifying messages and 

the  idea  of  collective  achievement,  while  in  pre-election  speeches,  they  may 

function more as persuasive tools to frame policy positions. 

Last but not least, a particularly significant shift is observed in the use of 

irony. In the pre-election speeches, irony is employed more frequently (Trump –  

2.4%;  Bush  –   2%;  Obama  –  1.4%)  than  in  victory  speeches  (Trump  –  0.6%; 

Bush  –  0.6%;  Obama  –  0.3%).  This  downward  shift  is  also  explained  by  a 

change  in  communicative  goals.  In  pre-election  contexts,  irony  functions  as  a 

tool  for  critique,  differentiation,  or  emotional  appeal, as it is most vividly seen 

in Trump’s utterances. In contrast, victory speeches minimise irony, as the focus 

 
129 

shifts  from  contest  to  celebration, in which this device can rather be utilised to 

foster a positive and engaging atmosphere.  

To sum up, the most relevant devices that indicate certain shifts have been 

outlined.  Their  comparative  analysis  reveals  that  the  way  presidents  use 

language cues changes a lot depending on the type of speech they give, as well 

as their cultural background and political affiliations.  

2.5 Results 

The  results  obtained  on  the  basis  of  linguistic  and  cultural  analysis  of 

pre-election  and  victory  speeches  by  Donald  John  Trump,  Barack  Hussein 

Obama,  and  George Walker Bush demonstrate a close interconnection between 

the  language  and  socio-cultural  backgrounds  of  the  speakers. For the purposes 

of  conducting  a  holistic  representation  of  the  speakers’  linguistic  choices  and 

their  impacts  on  the  produced  effects  on  communication,  including  the 

manipulativeness,  emotional  density  and  cultural  load  that  together  create 

powerful,  persuasive  messages  and  reflect  the  peculiarities  of  a  person  as  a 

representative of a particular culture. 

First of all, the findings that are based on the critical discourse analysis of 

the  speeches  reflect  the  major  functions  of  the  identified  expressive  means, 

stylistic devices, and rhetorical strategies employed by the presidents. Taking 

into account the distinctive features of the cultural backgrounds of the speakers 

and the political discourse, namely, high degree of formality, dependence of the 

topicality of the political addresses on the social, historical and cultural contexts 

in  the  life  of  the  country,  and  certain  communicative  goals  followed  by  the 

speakers,  critical  discourse  analysis  has  been  implemented  in order to uncover 

implied ideologies, power relations, and policy framing in the chosen speeches. 

Then,  having  identified  all  the  examples of peculiar use of language, a content 

analysis  method  has  been  applied  to  make  calculations  and  visualisations  to 

 
130 

acquire the representative data, featuring the number of occurrences, and all the 

examples of the tools that facilitated further comparisons of the features.  

To  begin  with,  it  has  been  revealed  that  the  central  units  of  analysis,  in 

particular,  culturally-loaded  linguistic  units,  serve  as  tools  that  allude  to  the 

highly  resonant  concepts,  events,  slogans,  values,  and  shared  knowledge  and 

appear  to  be  the  most  frequently-employed  figures  of  speech  by  each  of  the 

presidents, constituting 11% in Trump’s, 14.8% in Bush’s, and 14% in Obama’s 

pre-election  addresses.  The  prevalence  of  allusions  is  similarly  high  in  their 

victory  speeches,  with  Obama  reaching  16.6%, Bush 12.9%, and Trump 7.8%. 

This extensive use underscores the importance of culturally-loaded references in 

establishing  shared  values  and  resonating  with  the  audience  in  the  context  of 

political  discourse  that  is  being  constantly  influenced  by  changing  societal, 

economic and cultural tendencies. 

Moving from allusions to other forms of figurative language, metaphors 

also  play  a  significant  role,  though  their  distribution  varies  more  notably 

between  speakers  and  speech  types.  In  the  pre-election  utterances,  metaphors 

account  for  7.4%  in  Trump’s,  16%  in  Bush’s,  and  10.5%  in Obama’s rhetoric, 

while in the second type of speeches, Obama’s use of metaphors rises sharply to 

17.9%, while Bush’s and Trump’s decrease to 9.1% and 4.6%, respectively. This 

shift  indicates  a  shared  tendency  for  some  speakers  to  intensify  metaphorical 

language when addressing the nation before the actual election process to frame 

the  ideas  that  succinctly  benefit  their  campaign;  and  the  opposite  tendency  of 

using  metaphors  after  the  inauguration  to   reinforce  the  themes  of  unity  and 

progress, and highlight the fact that the citizens made the right decision. 

In  addition  to  metaphors,  the  linguistic  and  cultural  analysis  of  stylistic 

devices  reveals  that  metonymy  and  its  special  cases  (synecdoche  and 

antonomasia)  are  present  in  the  speeches  of  all  presidents,  though  with  some 

fluctuation.  In  the  pre-election  addresses, metonymy appears in 2.1% (Trump), 

3.6%  (Bush),  and  4.9%  (Obama),  while  in  victory  speeches,  its  use  is slightly 

 
131 

reduced, with 1.8% (Trump), 3.8% (Bush), and 1.3% (Obama). The presence of 

these  devices  demonstrates  the  speakers’  tendency  to  use  associative  and 

representative  language  to  reinforce  key  ideas  and  identities,  and  inspire  the 

cognitive recognition of the popular concepts or people being described. 

Further  on,  the  use  of  hyperbole  demonstrates  both  consistency  and 

variation.  In  the pre-election speeches, Donald Trump employs hyperbole most 

frequently (9.6%), followed by Barack Obama (4.7%) and George Bush (3.1%). 

In  victory speeches, Bush increases his use of hyperbole to 7.6%, while Trump 

and Obama use it less, at 6% and 4.2%, respectively.  

However, it is crucial to point out that these shifts are partially explained 

by  the  fact  that  the  content  density  of  all three pre-election speeches is greater 

than  the  one  of  the victory ones. In particular, while the former contains 14-15 

pages each, the latter consists of 4 pages in the case of George Bush and Donald 

Trump,  and  8  pages  in  Barack  Obama’s  speech.  This  variation  is  not  solely  a 

matter  of  quantitative  difference  but  is  also  deeply  impacted  by  the 

communicative  goals  of  each  speech  type.  Pre-election  speeches  are  typically 

characterised by the extensive enumeration of policies, promises, and arguments 

aimed  at  persuading  and  manipulating  the  listeners.  This  requires  a  more 

detailed  and  comprehensive  rhetorical  approach,  resulting  in  longer  speeches 

and  a  higher  density  of  certain  devices,  such  as  hyperbole,  which  serve  to 

exaggerate the urgency of the need to vote for the speaker. 

In contrast, victory speeches are generally more concise, reflecting a shift 

in  communicative  purpose  from  detailed  argumentation to the celebration. The 

focus  moves  away  from  enumerating  future  plans toward expressing gratitude, 

which  can  be  effectively  conveyed  in  a  shorter  format  that  does  not  require 

extensive listing or justification. 

Nevertheless, the case of Barack Obama’s victory speech stands out as an 

exception  to  this  trend.  Despite  being  a  victory  address,  its  length  (8  pages) 

exceeds that of Bush’s and Trump’s, a feature that can be attributed to Obama’s 

 
132 

extensive  use  of  successive  and  numerous  parallel  constructions  that  frame 

similar  ideas  of  gratitude  and  common  responsibility.  This  stylistic  choice 

shows how structural devices can shape both the length and the communicative 

impact  of  a  speech,  adapting  the  usual  conciseness  of  the  victory  addresses. 

Thus,  the  differences  in  how  often  hyperbole  and  other  stylistic  devices  are 

utilised  can be explained by both the length of the speeches and different goals 

of each speech type, as well as by the individual rhetorical strategies chosen by 

each president and influenced by their backgrounds and political affiliations. 

Furthermore,  the  analysis  reveals  a  noticeable  increase  in  the  use  of 

epithets  and  intensifiers  in  victory  speeches  compared  to  pre-election 

addresses.  For  instance,  Trump’s  use  of  epithets  rises  from  11.4%  to  19.8%, 

Bush’s  from  4.8%  to  9.1%,  and  Obama’s  from  2.1%  to  5.1%.  Similarly, 

intensifiers show an increase, especially for Trump (from 9% to 13.8%), whose 

use  of  these  expressive  means  stands  out  dramatically,  compared  to  the  other 

presidents (only 0.5 % and 2.3 % by George Bush; 2.5 % and 1.9 % by Barack 

Obama), who tend to enhance the effectiveness of the speech by using figurative 

meanings  (i.e.  using  metaphors,  hyperboles,  syntactic  repetitions,  and  other 

figures of speech). 

When  examining 

the  devices  associated  with 

implied  critique, 

argumentation,  and  emotional  engagement,  such  as  irony  and  rhetorical 

questions,  a  clear  decline  is  observed  in  victory  speeches.  Irony,  for example, 

drops  from  2.4%  in  Trump’s, 2% in Bush’s, and 1.4% in Obama’s pre-election 

speeches  to  0.6%,  0.6%,  and  0.3%  respectively  in  their  victory  speeches. 

Rhetorical  questions,  present  in  pre-election  speeches  (Trump  –  2.4%;  Bush  – 

0.8%;  Obama – 0.4%), are almost entirely absent in the victory context, except 

for  the  3  instances  of  their  utilisation  by  Donald  Trump.  This  reduction 

represents  a  shift  from  confrontation,  debate,  and  persuasion  towards 

affirmation.  

 
133 

Alongside  these  trends,  the  use  of  pathos,  an  appeal  to  emotions 

manipulative strategy generally increases in victory speeches. For instance, this 

rhetorical  strategy  rises  from  5.4%  to  15.2% in Bush’s utterance, while Trump 

and  Obama  maintain  high  levels  (3.9%  to  9.2%  and  8.8%  to  9.3%, 

respectively).  The  appeals  to  emotion  stand  out  among  other  rhetorical 

strategies  employed  by  the  presidents,  and  this  can  also  be  explained  by  the 

nature of such political addresses, both of which aim to persuade and effect the 

decision making of the potential voter. 

In  addition  to  pathos,  the  results  also  reveal  shifts  in  the  use  of  other 

classical  rhetorical  strategies.  Ethos,  representing  appeals  to  the  speaker’s 

credibility  and  authority,  is  present  in  both  pre-election  and  victory  speeches, 

with a slight increase in the latter. For example, Bush’s ethos rises from 3.1% to 

4.5%,  Trump’s  from  1.9%  to  2.8%,  and  Obama’s  from  1.2%  to  2.6%.  This 

increase  suggests  that,  in  the  context  of  victory,  presidents  are  more  likely  to 

emphasise their legitimacy and moral standing, reinforcing their role as national 

leaders. 

Conversely, 

the  presence  of 

logical  appeals  and  structured 

argumentation shows an expected decline in victory speeches. Obama’s use of 

evidence  and  statistics  decreases  from  2.3%  to  0.6%,  Bush’s  from  2.6%  to 

1.5%,  and  Trump’s  from  1.1%  to  0.5%.  This  drop  is  also  an  indicator  of  the 

characteristic features of the two kinds of speeches: while pre-election speeches 

require  logical  reasoning  and  evidence  to  persuade  undecided  voters,  victory 

speeches  focus  less  on  justification  of  the  policies  benefits  and  more  on 

emotional resonance. 

Finally,  the  utilisation  of kairos, or the rhetorical appeal to timeliness or 

urgency  of  the  implied  action,  also  varies  between  the  two  speech  types  and 

presidents.  In  the  pre-election  speeches,  call-to-action  appeals  appear  at  1.4% 

for  Trump,  0.8%  for  Bush,  and  2.5%  for  Obama.  In  victory  speeches,  Bush 

increases  his  use  of  kairos  to  2.3%,  Obama’s  drops  to  1.3%,  and  Trump’s  is 

 
134 

absent.  These  statistics  suggest  that  the  strategic  framing  of  the  need  to 

undertake  certain  actions  is  more  relevant  in  the  paradigm  of  the  messages 

delivered  before  elections,  and  thus  is  almost  omitted  in  another  kind  of 

speeches.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Barack  Obama  is  the  one  who  implements  the 

strategy the most frequently (14 against 3 and 9 instances detected in Bush’s and 

Trump’s  pre-election  speeches  respectively).  The  examples  identified  in 

Obama’s utterance are most often hidden in the identical constructions (“If you 

choose  this  path…  If  you  stand  with  us…”)  that  are  utilised  in  both  his 

pre-election  and  victory  speeches,  thus  making  them  more  prolonged  and 

cohesive. 

Taken together, these results show that while emotional appeals (pathos) 

become more prominent in victory speeches, appeals to logic (logos) decrease, 

and appeals to credibility (ethos) and collective action (kairos) are adapted to 

fit the changing communicative aims.  

In  regard  to  syntactic  devices, the data indicate that all three make use 

of  a  wide  range  of  structures  to  enhance  expressiveness  and  coherence  of  the 

delivered messages. In pre-election speeches, parallelism is particularly notable 

for  Bush  (8.7%)  and  Obama  (8.1%),  while  Trump’s  use  is  drastically  lower 

(1.9%).  In  victory  speeches,  parallelism  becomes  even  more  conspicuous, 

especially  for  Obama  (12.1%),  Bush  (7.6%),  and  Trump  (8.3%).  Similarly, 

anaphora is employed in both contexts, with Obama using it most frequently in 

pre-election  speeches  (7.4%)  and  maintaining  a  high  level  in  victory  speeches 

(5.8%).  

Furthermore,  devices  such  as  epiphora  (Trump:  3.7%  –  in  pre-election; 

2.3%  –  in  victory),  anadiplosis  (Trump:  2.6%  –  pre-election,  0.9%  –  victory), 

and  antithesis  (Obama:  6.2%  –  pre-election,  1.6%  –  victory)  are  also  present, 

though generally at lower rates in victory speeches. Additionally, the analysis of 

Trump’s  rhetoric  reveals  exceptional  features  in  terms  of  ellipsis  and 

parcellation.  In  pre-election  speeches,  Trump  employs  ellipsis  (5.1%)  and 

 
135 

parcellation (5.5%) at significantly higher rates than Bush (0.3% and 0.5%) and 

Obama  (0.4%  and  0.4%).  What  is  more,  even  in  victory  speeches,  Trump 

continues  to  use  these  devices  more  frequently  (ellipsis:  3.2%,  parcellation: 

2.3%) compared to the other presidents, whose usage remains below 1%. These 

findings  suggest  a  distinctive  syntactic  fragmentation  in  Trump’s  style, 

contributing  to  a  more  dynamic  and  direct  delivery,  sometimes  accompanied 

with a slight degree of informality. 

In  summary,  the  results  of  a  mixed-methods  linguistic  and  cultural 

analysis illustrate clear shifts in the frequency and selection of linguistic devices 

by  the  presidents. Despite the fact that culturally-loaded references, metaphors, 

and  other  expressive  means  are  consistently  important  and  present,  their 

utilisation is adapted to the communicative goals of two kinds of speeches.  

Discussion  

In the framework of linguistic and cultural approach, based on which the 

outlined quantitative and qualitative data has been obtained, the results must be 

interpreted  in  terms  of  their  interrelation  with  the  speaker’s  socio-cultural 

backgrounds.   

One  of  the most outstanding findings is the distinctive rhetorical style of 

Donald  Trump,  which  is  characterised  by  frequent  use  of  ellipsis  and 

parcellation,  which  are  not  the  characteristic  features  of  the  formal  and 

ceremonial  register  of  the  pre-election  and  victory  speeches,  alongside  a 

numerous  utilisation  of  hyperbole  and  epithets.  These  linguistic  choices 

contribute  to  a  fragmented  and  direct  style  that  aligns  with  Trump’s  personal 

background,  namely  his  initial  career  as  a  businessman.  In  particular,  these 

tendencies of the use of short but still meaningful and catchy phrases reflect the 

common  features  associated  with  the  economic  discourse  and  business 

communication,  the  main  goal  of  which  is  to catch the attention and persuade. 

Furthermore,  the  extensive  use  of  hyperbole  and  intensifiers  also  aligns  with 

 
 
136 

Trump’s  background  as  a  businessman  and  media  personality  that  is  

accustomed to engaging broad audiences through emotive and rhythmic tools.  

In contrast, Barack Obama’s speeches are characterised by a more formal, 

structured,  and  cohesive  style,  marked  by  the  extensive  use  of  parallelism, 

anaphora,  epiphora,  antithesis,  and  anadiplosis.  These  devices  contribute  to  a 

narrative  technique  that  is  both  elevated  and  manipulative,  reflecting  Obama’s 

educational  achievements  (i.e.  his  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  and  later  Law  and 

International  Relations  degree),  multicultural  background,  and  oratorical 

practices.  His  frequent  use  of  culturally-loaded  metaphors  and  allusions,  often 

referencing  historical,  religious,  symbolic  concepts  help  to  persuade  the 

audience through shared values and collective memory.  

As for George Bush’s rhetorical style, the results, featuring the topics that 

the  presidents  most  often  alludes  to  and the stylistic devices he tends to utilise 

the  most,  also  reflect  the  interconnection  of  his  socio-cultural  experiences and 

belonging  to  a  Republican  party.  For  instance,  the  peculiar  use  of  pathos  and 

hyperbole  in his victory speeches correlate with his Texas cultural background, 

including  his  upbringing  in  the  family  closely  related  to  politics,  and 

conservative political identity, which emphasise patriotism, moral standing, and 

traditional values. 

  Bush’s  rhetoric  often  invokes  traditional  American  principles  and 

historical  symbolism,  reinforcing  his  credibility  and  authority  while  appealing 

to  socially  resonant  ideologies.  His  frequent  use  of  such  figures  of  speech  as 

allusions  and  metaphors  that  prevail  in  contrast  to  hyperbole  and  intensifiers 

reflects  a  more  restrained  but  authoritative  style  aimed  at  gaining  support  and 

framing his policies as the most promising ones.  

Syntactically,  George  Bush  employs  such  devices  as  parallelism  and 

anaphora  to  structure  his  messages  logically  and  effectively,  though  with  less 

rhythmic  complexity  than  Barack  Obama.  His  rhetorical  style  reflects  a 

preference  for  straightforwardness  and  formality,  consistent  with  his  political 

 
137 

affiliation,  upbringing  in the family of another influential republican politician, 

peculiarities  of  South  America’s  traditions  and culture, and the expectations of 

his core supporters.  

It  is  worth  stating  that  the  analysis  conducted  in  the  given  study  has 

certain limitations in terms of the scope of the analysed layers of the expressive 

means of language. It is due to the fact that the initial aim of the study is related 

to  the  reflection  of  the  most  vivid  and  representative  linguistic  choices 

implemented  by  the  politicians  in  their  speaker  with  a  focus  on  the  verbal 

linguistic  tools  that  have  been  utilised  by  the  presidents.  The  analysis  of  the 

lexical and syntactic categories of expressive means and stylistic devices with a 

concentration on the peculiarities expressed verbally through the use of various 

linguistic features has allowed for a more thorough and in-depth examination of 

the  figurative  and  structural components of the speech that enhance the overall 

effectiveness of the perception of the utterances.  

Thus, the extension of the acquired results requires further research on the 

topic  that  would  shed  light  on  the  peculiar,  culture-specific  use  of  non-verbal 

cues  within the political discourse. Further investigations would contribute to a 

more  comprehensive  understanding  of  how  verbal  and  non-verbal  elements 

interact to shape persuasive political communication and cultural identity. 

Conclusion  

The  given  research  aimed  at  identifying  the  interrelation  between 

language  and  culture  in  shaping  political  discourse  using  the  linguistic  and 

cultural  analytical  framework,  with  a  particular focus on the linguistic features 

and  rhetorical  strategies  that  are  employed  in  21st  century  U.S.  presidential 

speeches.  By  analysing  both  pre-election  and  victory  speeches  of  George  W. 

Bush,  Barack  Obama,  and  Donald  Trump  from  their  second  terms,  the  study’ 

goal  was  to  uncover  how  these  linguistic  choices  reflect  broader  cultural  and 

 
 
 
138 

societal  dynamics,  and  how  political  leaders  navigate  cultural  sensitivities  to 

effectively resonate with their audiences. 

The  findings  acquired  with  the  use  of  mixed-methods  research  design 

have  helped  to  answer  the  primary  research  questions  of  study  and  confirmed 

that  the  presidents’  use  of  culture-specific  linguistic  devices  is  deeply 

intertwined  with  their  personal  backgrounds,  cultural  identities,  and  political 

affiliations.  Critical  discourse  and  content  analyses  carried  out  in  the  study 

demonstrated  that  each  president  employs  a  distinct  set  of  stylistic  devices, 

expressive  means  of  language  and  rhetorical  strategies,  ranging  from  Trump’s 

fragmented  and  emphatic style to Obama’s complex and rhythmically cohesive 

oratory,  and  Bush’s  balanced,  traditional  rhetoric  –  all  reflecting  their  unique 

cultural experiences and the features of communicative goals of two types of the 

examined  speeches.  Furthermore,  the  research  has  revealed  that  the  frequency 

and  functions  of  these devices vary between pre-election and victory speeches, 

aligning with the distinct communicative situations of the utterances. 

Importantly, 

the 

initial  hypothesis  that  culturally-loaded  linguistic 

features  and  rhetorical  strategies  are  strategically  used  by  political  leaders  to 

enhance message effectiveness and audience perception has been supported and 

proved by the analysis. The study’s results emphasise that the language used in 

political discourse is not only a tool for persuasion and manipulation, but also a 

reflection of cultural identity and societal values. 

The practical implications of this study are multifaceted. Firstly, the study 

contributes  to  the  existing  research  field  focusing  on  cultural  linguistics  by 

providing  empirical  data  featuring  the  examination  of  the  correlation  between 

language and culture and its manifestation in the linguistic choices of three U.S. 

presidents that represent unique cultural backgrounds. 

Secondly,  the  findings  provide  valuable  insights for other studies related 

to  the  manipulativeness  and  emotionality  of  political  discourse,  since  these 

aspects are paid close attention in the study and are thoroughly discussed in the 

 
139 

Content  Analysis  Section.   Finally,  the  study  provides  a  comprehensive 

groundwork  for  further  interdisciplinary  research,  suggesting  that  future 

investigations  could  expand  to  include  non-verbal  communication  analysis 

within the framework of political communication. 

In  conclusion, 

this 

research  highlights 

the  significance  of 

the 

implementation  of  linguistic  and  cultural  analysis  in  the  study  of  the 

peculiarities of political discourse, since it is a domain that is greatly influenced 

by  the  cultural  aspects  of  the  country’s  life.  Furthermore,  the  findings  clearly 

illustrate that the linguistic and cultural identities of the speakers indeed impact 

the  expressiveness,  and  the  effects produced within the utterances delivered by 

these speakers.  

 
 
140 

References 

Abuhamda,  E.  A.  A.,  Ismail,  I.  A.,  &  Bsharat,  T. R. K. (2021). Understanding 

Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Research  Methods:  A  Theoretical 

Perspective  for  Young  Researchers.  International  Journal  of  Research, 

8(2), 71-87. https://doi.org/10.2501/IJMR-201-5-070 

Al-Ameedi,  R.  T.,  & Mukhef, R. N. (2017). Aspects of Political Language and 

Parallelism. Journal of Education and Practice, 8(34), 185-200. 

Almahasees,  Z.,  &  Mahmoud,  S.  (2022).  Persuasive  Strategies  utilized  in  the 

Political  Speeches  of  King  Abdullah  II:  A  Critical  Discourse  Analysis. 

Cogent 

Arts 

and 

Humanities, 

9(1). 

https://doi.org/10.1080/23311983.2022.2082016 

Amanda,  A.  (2017).  Metaphor,  metonymy,  and  voice  in  political  debates:  A 

discourse  analysis   study.  Applied  Linguistics  Research  Journal,  1(1), 

41–48. doi: 10.14744/alrj.2017.58077 

Antonova,  A.  V.  (2011).  How  politicians  do  things  with  words:  Intentional 

analysis  of  pre-election  speeches.  California  Linguistic  Notes,  36(1), 

1-17. 

Aripova, K. Y. (2023). Studying Nonverbal Means of Communication. Oriental 

Renaissance:  Innovative,  educational,  natural  and  social  sciences,  3(6), 

535-542. 

Atkinson, J. (1984). Manpower Strategies for Flexible Organizations. Personnel 

Management, 16, 28-31. 

 
141 

Avazova,  M.  (2024).  The  Analysis  of  Nonverbal  Communication:  History and 

Importance.  Central  Asian  Journal  of  Multidisciplinary  Research  and 

Management Studies, 1(5), 220-225. 

Awawdeh,  N.  A.  (2023).  A  Critical  Discourse  Analysis  of  President  Donald 

Trump’s  Speeches  during  the  Coronavirus  Pandemic  Crisis.  World 

Journal 

of 

English 

Language, 

13(5), 

392. 

https://doi.org/10.5430/wjel.v13n5p392 

Azadsarv,  M.,  Taghvaee,  M.,  &  Zamani,  S.  (2015).  Cultural  Exophoric 

references  in  English  textbooks  used  at  four  common  English  textbooks 

used  at  Iranian  English  Language  Institutes:  A  Comparative  Discursive 

Study  of  the  Degree  of  Referential  Burden.  Journal  of  Research  in 

Applied 

Linguistic 

Studies, 

5, 

66–75. 

https://doi.org/10.22055/rals.2015.11270 

Babayev, J. (2024). The Role of Conjunctions, Disjunctions and Prepositions in 

The  Formation  of  Stylistic  Devices.  German  International  Journal  of 

Modern Science, 77, 30-32. 

Beaugrande,  R.  (1997).  The  Story  of  Discourse  Analysis.  Discourse  as 

Structure  and  Process:  Discourse  Studies:  A  Multidisciplinary 

Introduction. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446221884.n2 

Bolbakov,  R.  G.,  Sinitsyn,  A.  V.,  &  Tsvetkov,  V.  Y.  (2020).  Methods  of 

comparative  analysis.  Journal  of  Physics:  Conference  Series,  1679(5), 

1-6. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1679/5/052047 

Borysov,  O.  O.,  &  Vasylieva,  O.H.  (2021).  Syntactic  Stylistic  Means  of  The 

British  And  Ukrainian  Parliamentary  Debate.  Nauchnyj  byulleten' 

 
mezhdunarodnogo 

gumanitarnogo 

universiteta, 

50(1), 

32-36. 

https://doi.org/10.32841/2409-1154.2021.50-1.7 

142 

Butenko,  E.  Y.  (2008).  Bazovye  Edinicy  Lingvokul'turologii  [Basic  Units  Of 

Linguoculturology]. 

Vestnik 

Rostovskogo 

gosudarstvennogo 

ekonomicheskogo universiteta “RINH”, 2, 321-328. 

Bystrov,  N. A. (2024). Contemporary American Political Discourse: a Study of 

Content,  Structure,  and  Formation  Features.  Professional  Discourse  & 

Communication, 

6(2), 

35–48. 

https://doi.org/10.24833/2687-0126-2024-6-2-35-48 

Cap,  P. (2023). Introduction to the Handbook of Political Discourse. Handbook 

of Political Discourse, 1-4. 

Chilton,  P.  (2004).  Analysing  Political  Discourse  Theory  and  practice 

(Routledge ed.). 

Cropley,  A.  (2021).  Introduction 

to  Qualitative  Research  Methods:  A 

practice-oriented  introduction  for  students  of  psychology  and  education 

(3rd ed.). https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.3095.6888/1 

Dellagnelo,  E.  H.  L.,  Böhm,  S.,  &  de  Mendonça,  P.  M.  E.  (2014). Organizing 

Resistance  Movements:  The  Contribution  of  Political  Discourse  Theory. 

RAE - Revista de Administração de Empresas, 54(2), 141-153. 

Dobrova,  V.,  Zhuravlev,  A.,  Sysueva,  I.,  Menshenina,  S.,  &  Hashimov,  E. 

(2018).  On  Some  Issues  of  Conceptualization  and  Categorization  by 

Means  of  Natural  Language.  SHS  Web  of  Conferences  50. 

https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20185001043 

 
143 

Eller, J. D. (2015). Culture and Diversity in the United States: So Many Ways to 

Be American. 

Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and Social Change (Polity Press ed.). 

Fairclough, N., & Fairclough, I. (2012). Political Discourse Analysis. A Method 

For Advanced Studies (Routledge ed.). 

Fanani,  A.,  Setiawan,  S.,  Purwati,  O.,  Maisarah,  M.,  &  Qoyyimah,  U.  (2019). 

Donald Trump’s grammar of persuasion in his speech. Heliyon, 6(1), 1-7. 

doi:10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e03082 

Fanania,  Z.,  Rahayu,  A.  P.,  &  Erlando,  A.  (2024).  Determining  factors  to 

implementing  IFRS  for  SMES:  a  study  in  International  Accounting 

Standards Board countries. Cogent Business & Management, 11(1), 1-15. 

Fatkullina, F. (2017). Basic notions of linguocultural analysis. RUDN Journal of 

Russian and Foreign Languages Research and Teaching, 15(2), 175-188. 

https://doi.org/10.22363/2313-2264-2017-15-2-175-188 

Frost,  M.  (2002).  Justice  Scalia's  rhetoric  of  dissent:  A  Greco-Roman analysis 

of  Scalia's  advocacy  in  the  VMI  case.  Kentucky  Law  Journal,  91(1), 

167-227. 

Galperin, I. R. (1981). Stylistics (3rd ed.). 

Gao,  H.  L.,  &  Feng,  X.  F.  (2014).  The  Role  of  Palmer  Cultural  Linguistics  in 

Translation.  International  Conference  on  Management  Science  and 

Management Innovation (MSMI 2014), 103-106. 

 
144 

Gennaro, G., & Ash, E. (2022). Emotion and Reason in Political Language. The 

Economic 

Journal, 

132 

(643), 

1037–1059. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/ej/ueab104 

Gerasimov,  V.  I.,  &  Ilyin,  M.  V.  (2002).  Politicheskij  diskurs-analiz  [Political 

discourse analysis]. Politicheskaya nauka, 3, 68–75. 

Gimranova, T. A., Kolosova, E. I., Sokolova, A., & Li, M. (2019). Antithesis as 

Leverage  in  Russian  Political  Discourse.  Journal of Research in Applied 

Linguistics, 10, 605-611. 

Glonti, B. (2020). Proverb as a Tool of Persuasion in Political Discourse (on the 

Material  of  Georgian  and  French  languages).  Theory  and  Practice  in 

Language Studies, 10(6), 632-637. 

Glynos,  J.,  Howarth,  D.,  Norval,  A.,  &  Speed,  E.  (2009).  Discourse  Analysis: 

Varieties  and  Methods.  ESRC  National  Centre  for  Research  Methods 

Review paper. 

Golubeva,  T.  M.  (2019). Hyperbole as a Persuasion Tool in Political Discourse 

(The  Case  of  British  Politicians’  Speech).  Science   Journal   of  VolSU. 

Linguistics, 18(3), 195-205. https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2019.3.16 

Gornostayeva,  A.  (2016).  American  Political  Discourse:  Irony  In  Pre-Election 

Campaign. Russian Journal of Linguistics, 20(4), 179-196. 

Gornostaeva,  A.,  &  Semenovskaya,  M.  (2018).  Humour  and  irony  in  modern 

political  discourse.  Proceedings  of  ADVED  2018-4th  International 

Conference  on  Advances  in  Education  and  Social  Sciences,  Istanbul, 

Turkey, 590-594. 

 
145 

Gurevich,  L.  (2022).  Expressive  Speech  Acts  in  Political  Discourse:  An 

Integrative  Approach  Perspective.  Journal  of  Advanced  Research  in 

Social Sciences, 5(2), 18-35. https://doi.org/10.33422/jarss.v5i2.783 

Harris,  R.  A.  (2017).  Writing  with  Clarity  and  Style.  A  Guide  to  Rhetorical 

Devices 

for  Contemporary  Writers 

(2nd  ed.). 

In  Routledge. 

https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203712047 

Harutyunyan,  R.  (2021).  Approaches  and  theories  to  the  study  of  political 

speech. 

Armenian 

Folia 

Anglistika, 

17(1(23)), 

51-61. 

https://doi.org/10.46991/AFA/2021.17.1.052 

Hasanova,  G.  H.  (2019).  Analysis  of  communication  of  verbal  and non-verbal 

means of communication. Ekonomika i sotsium, 12(67), 54-56. 

Hu,  X.  (2024).  The  Conceptual Metaphor and Its Application Value to Foreign 

Language  Teaching.  Open  Access  Library  Journal,  11(e11451),  1-8. 

https://doi.org/10.4236/oalib.1111451H 

Hui,  L.,  &  Luchinskaya,  E. N. (2024). Osobennosti verbalnogo i neverbalnogo 

etiketa  v  kitayskoy  i  russkoy  lingvokulturakh  [Features  of  verbal  and 

non-verbal  communication  etiquette  in  chinese  and  russian  linguistic 

cultures]. Vestnik AGU. Vestnik ASU. Series: Philology and Art Criticism, 

1(332), 61-68. 

Humă,  B.  (2023).  Language  and  persuasion:  A  discursive  psychological 

approach.  Social  and  Personality  Psychology  Compass,  17(6). 

https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12755 

 
146 

Jain,  A.,  &  Shukla,  D.  (2025).  Stratified  Random  Sampling  With  Risk 

Approach. Reliability: Theory & Applications, 1(82), 277-289. 

Jiang,  X.  (2017).  Experimental  Approaches  to  Socio‐Linguistics:  Usage  and 

Interpretation  of  Non‐Verbal  and  Verbal  Expressions  in  Cross‐  Cultural 

Communication.  Sociolinguistics 

- 

Interdisciplinary  Perspectives, 

125-137. http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69879 

Kemertelidze, N., & Manjavidze, T. (2013). Stylistic Repetition, Its Peculiarities 

and Types in Modern English. European Scientific Journal, 1-8. 

Karaulov, Y. (1987). Russian language and linguistic personality. Moscow: 

Science. 

Khajavi, Y., & Rasti, A. (2020). A discourse analytic investigation into 

politicians’ use of rhetorical and persuasive strategies: The case of US 

election speeches. Cogent Arts & Humanities, 7, 1-15. 

Khasanova, L. I. (2015). Nonverbal Means of Oral Communication as a Marker 

of National and Cultural Identity. 

Khdair, S. J. (2016). Repetition as a Rhetorical Device in the Political Speeches 

of Three Egyptian Presidents: Mubarak, Morsi and Al-Sisi. A 

Comparative Translation Study. 

Krippendorff, K. (2018). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. 

Sage publications. 

 
147 

Kudu, M.Z., & Isa, S.M. (2023). Rhetoric and political power: analyzing 

language and persuasion in political discourse. TASAMBO Journal of 

Language, Literature and Culture, 2(2), 31-38. 

Kuriata, Y. V., & Kasatkina-Kubyshkina, O. V. (2022). Stylistic devices in 

political discourse. Nauchnye zapiski Nacional'nogo universiteta 

"Ostrozhskaya akademiya": seriya "Filologiya", 13(81), 27-30. doi: 

10.25264/2519-2558-2022-13(81)-27-30 

Lakoff,  G.  (1992).  The  Contemporary  Theory  of  Metaphor.  In  Metaphor  and 

Thought (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 

Lantsevskaya,  N.  Y.  (2022).  Semiotic  analysis’  as  a  methodological  technique 

for  studying 

literature.  Journal  of  Shadrinsk  State  Pedagogical 

University, 1(53). doi: 10.52772/25420291_2022_1_105 

Litvinov,  A.  V.,  &  Ubiyko,  V.  V.  (2017).  The  Role  Of  Allusion  In  The 

Advertising Slogans. 

Liu,  K.,  &  Guo,  F.  (2016).  Review  of  Critical  Discourse  Analysis  Studies  at 

Home  and  Abroad.  Theory  and  Practice  in  Language Studies, 6(5), 1-4. 

https://doi.org/10.17507/tpls.0605.23 

Liu,  X.,  &  Zhang,  H.  (2018).  Discourse  Analysis  of  the  Victory  Speech  of 

President  Trump  from 

the  Perspective  of  Theme  and  Thematic 

Progression Patterns. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 

Education,  Management,  Information  and  Management  Society  (EMIM 

2018). https://doi.org/10.2991/emim-18.2018.56 

 
Lungu,  L.  (2020).  Stylistic  Devices  And  Their  Political  Implications. 

Translation Studies: Retrospective and Prospective Views, 23, 82-89. 

148 

Madsen, M. W. (2015). Cognitive Metaphor Theory and the Metaphysics of 

immediacy. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 40(4). 

https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12320 

Makarychev, A., & Yatsyk, A. (2017). Lotman's Cultural Semiotics and the 

Political. Current Issues of Philology and Linguistics, 134-142. 

Malinovschi, T. (2020). Classification Features of Phraseological Units With 

Colours. Analele științifice ale USM, 156-159. 

Malkhazova, M. I. (2015). Lingvokul'turologiya kak samostoyatel'noe 

napravlenie lingvistiki [Linguoculturology as an independent branch of 

linguistics]. 

Mammadzada, S. S. (2023). Verbal and Non-verbal Communication in 

Linguistics. International Journal of Innovative Technologies in Social 

Science, 2(38). doi: 10.31435/rsglobal_ijitss/30062023/8003 

Manusov, V. (2016). Nonverbal Communication. International Encyclopedia of 

Communication Theory and Philosophy, 1-19. doi: 

10.1002/9781118766804.wbiect096 

Maqsudova, N. Z. Q. (2024). The Role of Stylistic Devices In Shaping Political 

Discourse And Public Engagement. Current Research Journal of 

Philological Sciences, 5(11), 10-12. 

https://doi.org/10.37547/philological-crjps-05-11-03 

 
149 

Maslova, V. A. (2001). Lingvokul’turologiya. Uchebnoe posobie dlya studentov 

vysshih uchebnyh zavedenij [Linguoculturology. Study guide for students 

of higher education institutions]. Izdatel’skij centr “Akademiya”. 

Maslova, V. A. (2019). Linguo-cultural Introduction To The Theory of Human. 

Bulletin of Moscow Region State University. Series: Linguistics, 3, 21-28. 

doi: 10.18384/2310-712X-2019-3-21-28 

Mizin, K., & Korostenski, J. (2019). “Western” Cultural Linguistics and 

“Post-soviet” Linguoculturology: Causes of Parallel Development. 

Lіngvіstichnі studії, 7-13. 

Mohamad, H. A., Pilus, Z., Mohaini, M. L., Md Zolkapli, R. B., & Abdul 

Wahab, N. H. (2022). Rhetorical Strategies for Appeal To Logos in 

Research Abstracts: An Analysis of Rhetoric. Muallim Journal of Social 

Sciences and Humanities, 6(3), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.33306/mjssh/200 

Monakhova, E. (2019). Cognitive and pragmatic approach to using stylistic 

devices in English literary discourse. Training, Language and Culture, 

3(1), 37-52. doi: 10.29366/2019tlc.3.1.3 

Musolff, A. (2017). Metaphor, irony and sarcasm in public discourse. Journal of 

Pragmatics, 109, 95-104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2016.12.010 

Musurmanova, S., & Kirgizbaeva, M. (2019). Stylistics And Stylistic Devices 

In English. Zhurnal “Studencheskij vestnik”, 20(70), 45-46. 

Nascimento, L. D. S., & Steinbruch, F. K. (2019). The interviews were 

transcribed, but how? Reflections on management research. RAUSP 

 
Management Journal, 54(4), 413-429. doi: 

10.1108/RAUSP-05-2019-0092 

150 

Nizomova, Z. M. (2021). Alliteration as a Literary Device. Mental 

Enlightenment Scientific-Methodological Journal, 3(3), 162-172. 

Ofori, E. A., Laryea, C. O., Kubi, B., & Fiawornu, V. Y. (2021). The use of 

Metaphors and Similes in a Political Discourse in Ghana. Lwati: A 

Journal of Contemporary Research, 18(2), 74-95. 

Oswald, S., & Rihs, A. (2013). Metaphor as argument: Rhetorical and epistemic 

advantages of extended metaphors. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10503-013-9304-0 

Palmer, G. B. (1996). Toward a Theory of Cultural Linguistics. Austin: 

University of Texas Press. 

Parsons,  V.  L.  (2017).  Stratified  sampling.  Wiley  StatsRef:  Statistics  Reference 

Online, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118445112.stat05999.pub2 

Peeters,  B.  (2019).  On  Linguoculturology  and  Cultural  Linguistics.  Vestnik 

NGU. Series: Linguistics and Intercultural Communication], 17(4), 6-11. 

https://doi.org/10.25205/1818-7935-2019-17-4-6-11 

Petrova,  S.  I.,  &  Petrov,  I.  F.  (2025).  On  the  Problem  of  Cultural  Universals. 

Voprosy 

teorii, 

3(219), 

219-224. 

doi: 

10.24412/2070-9773-2025-3219-219-224 

Podoliuc,  T.  (2018).  Peculiar  Grammatical  Features  Of  Political  Discourse. 

Lingvistica limbilor-culturi, 3(4), 58-68. 

 
151 

Poghosyan, O., & Gumashyan, V. (2021). On The Functions of Antonomasia In 

Political Discourse. Armenian Folia Anglistika, 17(1(23)), 62-71. 

Raesky,  A.  E.,  &  Novitri,  N.  (2023).  An  Analysis  of  Politeness  Strategies  in 

George  W.  Bush’s  Victory  Speeches.  IDEAS  Journal  on  English 

Language  Teaching  and  Learning  Linguistics  and  Literature,  11(2), 

1191-1201. 

Rahimova, I. (2024). The foundation of cultural linguistics. Eurasian Journal of 

Academic 

Research, 

4(7), 

197-200. 

doi: 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13188167 

Raissouni, I. (2020). The Language of American Political Discourse: Aristotle's 

Rhetorical Appeals as Manifested in Bush's and Obama's Speeches on the 

War  on  Terror.  International  Journal  of  Linguistics,  Literature  and 

Culture, 6(4), 38-48. doi: 10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.904 

Reisigl, M. (2008). Analyzing Political Rhetoric. Qualitative Discourse Analysis 

in the Social Sciences, 96-120. doi:10.1007/978-1-137-04798-4_5 

Renwick,  A.  &  Fieldhouse,  T.  (2023).  Healthy  Political  Discourse:  What  Is  It 

And Why Does It Matter? The Constitution Unit Briefing. 

Reyes,  A.  (2015).  Building  intimacy  through  linguistic  choices,  text  structure 

and voices in political discourse. Language & Communication 43, 58–71. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.LANGCOM.2015.05.002 

Sabirova, N. N. (2021). Non-verbal Communication. 

 
152 

Safina,  A.  V.  (2017).  Manipulation  With  The  Use  of  Non-verbal  Means  of 

Communication:  Is  It  Even  Possible?  Bulletin  of  Chelyabinsk  State 

University, 3(399), 110-115. 

Salih,  S.  M.,  &  Braim,  M.  M.  (2014).  A  Textual  Analysis  of  Hyperbole  and 

Litotes  in  Selected  English  Political Speeches. Anbar University Journal 

of Language & Literature, 16, 45-83. 

Sallomi,  A.  H.,  &  Chiad,  M.  O.  (2019).  A  Stylistic  Study  of  Repetition  and 

Ideology in Political Discourse: Donald Trump as a Case Study. 

Samatullaev,  D.,  &  Fayziyeva,  N.  (2024). The Power of Persuasion: Unveiling 

The  Pragmatic  Utilization  of  Stylistic  Devices  In  Political  Discourse. 

Builders of the Future, 4(4), 265-272. 

Schöll,  N.,  Gallego,  A.,  &  Le  Mens,  G.  (2021).  Politician-citizen  interactions 

and  dynamic  representation:  Evidence  from  Twitter.  Barcelona  GSE 

Working Paper Series. 

Semino, E. (2008). Metaphor in Discourse. Cambridge University Press. 

Shah,  S.  K.,  &  Ahmad,  M.  (2020).  Use  of  Repetition  as  a  Political  Discourse 

Manipulation  Device  in  the  Speeches  of  a  Pakistani  Prime  Minister. 

Journal of Politics and International Studies, 6(1), 39-56. 

Shaklein,  V.,  Karelova,  M.,  Mikova,  S.,  Deryabina,  S.,  &  Mitrofanova,  I. 

(2019).  Linguo-Cultural  Concept 

in  Describing  Linguo-Cultural 

Situation. Social And Cultural Transformation In The Process Of Cultural 

Globalism, 

76(2357-1330), 

1464-1466. 

https://doi.org/10.15405/epsbs.2019.12.04.198 

 
153 

Sharifian, F. (2003). On Cultural Conceptualisations. Journal of Cognition and 

Culture, 3(3), 187–207. https://doi.org/10.1163/156853703322336625 

Sharifian, F. (2017). Cultural Linguistics: the state of the art. Cultural 

linguistics, 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-4056-6_1 

Sinelnikova, A.P. (2022). Verbal Communication. Mezhdunarodnyj nauchnyj 

zhurnal «VESTNIK NAUKI», 10(55), 202-206. 

Skrebnev, Y. M. (1994). Fundamentals of English Stylistics (2nd ed.). 

Sukhanov, U. U. (2018). Politicheskij Diskurs Kak Ob’ekt Lingvisticheskogo 

Analiza [Political Discourse As An Object Of Linguistic Analysis]. 

RUDN Journal of Language Studies, Semiotics and Semantics, 9(1), 

200-212. 

Su Mon, A. (2023). Methods of Non-verbal Communication Conveying Loving 

Kindness and Compassion. 

Tadtayeva,  A.  V.,  Zangieva,  Z.N.,  &  Tsirikhova,  S.A.  (2015).  National  and 

cultural specific character of the verbal communication. Gumanitarnyye i 

sotsialnyye nauki, 2, 78-86. 

Talhadas,  R.,  Mamede,  N.,  &  Baptista,  J.  (2016).  Discourse  Structure  and 

Content  Analysis:  A  Computational  Linguistics’  Approach.  Proceedings 

of the International Congress on Interdisciplinarity in Social and Human 

Sciences, 410-426. 

Taherdoost,  H.  (2016).  Sampling  methods  in  research  methodology;  How  to 

choose  a  sampling  technique  for  research.  International   Journal   of  

 
Academic  

Research  

in  Management 

(IJARM),  5(2),  18-27. 

https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3205035 

154 

Telia,  V.  N.  (2005).  Yazyk  i  Obshchestvo.  O  fenomene  vosproizvodimosti 

yazykovyh  vyrazhenij  [Language  and  Society.  On  the  phenomenon  of 

reproducibility of linguistic expressions]. 

Tian,  L.  (2021).  Critical  Discourse  Analysis  of  Political  Discourse  —  A  Case 

Study  of  Trump's  TV Speech. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 

11(5), 516-520. 

Touaoula, Z. (2017). Non-verbal Communication and Cultural Differences. 

Urayimova, B. M. K. (2022). Linguoculturology as a discipline of language and 

culture.  Academic  research  in  educational  sciences,  3(4),  802-806.  doi: 

10.24412/2181-1385-2022-4-802-806 

Van  Dijk,  T.  A. 

(2006).  Political  Discourse  And 

Ideology.  DOXA 

COMMUNICATION №1, 207-225. 

Vinogradov,  V.  V.  (1997).  About  the  main  types  of  phraseological  units  in  the 

Russian  language.  In  Selected  works.  Lexicology  and  lexicography  (pp. 

140-161). 

Vorobyev, V. V., Zakirova, E. S., Anyushenkova, O. N., Digtyar, O. Y., & Reva, 

A.  R.  (2020).  Cultural  linguistics  and  language  for  special  purposes: 

cognitive,  ethnolinguistic  and 

linguocultural  approaches.  Revista 

ESPACIOS, 41(20), 270-278. 

 
155 

Vorobyev,  V.  V.  (2006).  Lingvokul’turologiya  [Linguoculturology]. Izdatel’stvo 

Rossijskogo universiteta druzhby narodov. 

Umurzakova,  D.  D. (2022). Analysis of Syntax Stylistic Methods and Devices. 

Oriental  Renaissance:  Innovative,  educational,  natural  and  social 

sciences, 2(3), 622-629. 

Urayimova, B. M. K. (2022). Linguoculturology as a discipline of language and 

culture. Academic research in educational sciences, 3(4), 802-806. 

Wilson,  J.,  &  Boxer,  D.  (2015).  Discourse,  politics  and  women.  Discourse, 

Politics and Women as Global Leaders, 1-18. 

Zakoyan,  L.  M.  (2014).  Characteristic  features  of  pre-election  speeches  of 

American politicians. 

Zhang,  J.,  Spirling,  A.,  &  Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,  C.  (2017).  Asking  too 

much? The rhetorical role of questions in political discourse. 

Zyubina,  I.  A.  (2023).   Interpretation  of  Verbal  and  Non-Verbal  Means  of 

Multimodal  Communication  (Based  on  Speeches  in  the  European 

Parliament).  Current  Issues  in Philology and Pedagogical Linguistics, 1, 

200-209. https://doi.org/10.29025/2079-6021-2023-1-200-209 

 
 
156 

Appendix 

Table 1.  

Trump's pre-election speech 

Graph 1. 

Table 2. 

Trump's victory speech 

Graph 2. 

Table 3. 

Bush's pre-election speech 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 3. 

157 

Table 4.  

Bush's victory speech 

Graph 4.  

Table 5. 

Obama's pre-election speech 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 5. 

158 

Table 6. 

Obama's victory speech 

Graph 6. 

Table 7.  

Pre-election Speeches 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identified 

Donald Trump 

George Bush 

Barack Obama 

159 

device 

Parcellation 

5.5 % 

Ellipsis 

5.1 % 

Inversion 

1.3 % 

(complete and 

partial) 

Enumeration  

2.1 % 

Intensifiers  

9 % 

Phraseological 

3.5 % 

units (fusions, 

unities, 

combinations) 

0.5 % 

0.3 % 

0.8% 

2.6 % 

0.5 % 

3.8 % 

0.4 % 

0.4 % 

0.4 % 

2.6 % 

2.5 % 

9.5 % 

Metaphor 

7. 4% 

16 % 

10.5 % 

(conceptual, 

orientational, 

ontological,  

structural) 

Personification   1 % 

11 % 

Allusion 

(cultural, 

historical, 

political, and 

other 

6.4 % 

14.8 % 

1.4 % 

14 % 

 
references) 

Metonymy and 

2.1 % 

3.6% 

4.9 % 

160 

its special 

cases 

(synecdoche 

and 

antonomasia) 

Epithet 

11.4 % 

Hyperbole  

9.6 % 

Irony  

2.4 % 

Rhetorical 

2.4 % 

question 

Anaphora 

2.1 % 

Epiphora 

3.7 % 

Anadiplosis 

2.6  % 

Framing 

2.6 % 

(slogans that 

have been 

repeated at the 

beginning and 

at the end of a 

sentence. 

paragraph or 

4.8 % 

3.1 % 

2 % 

0.8 % 

4.1 % 

0.8% 

0.8 % 

3.3 % 

2.1 % 

4.7 % 

1.4% 

0.4 % 

7.4 % 

0.2 % 

0.9 % 

2.1 % 

 
throughout the 

speech) 

Parallelism 

1.9 % 

8.7 % 

8.1 % 

161 

(partial 

and 

complete) 

Chiasmus 

0.8 % 

Antithesis 

2.7% 

Polysyndeton 

0.5 % 

Asyndeton 

0.8 % 

pathos 

ethos 

logos 

kairos  

3.9 % 

1.9 % 

1.1 % 

1. 4% 

Table 8.  

Victory Speeches 

0.8 % 

4.1 % 

3.8 % 

0.8 % 

5.4 % 

3.1 % 

2.6 % 

0.8% 

0.7 % 

6.2 % 

2.5 % 

1.1 % 

8.8 % 

1.2 % 

2.3 % 

2.5 % 

Identified device 

Donald Trump 

George Bush 

Parcellation 

2.3  % 

Ellipsis 

3.2 % 

Inversion (complete 

1.4 % 

and partial) 

0.8 % 

0 % 

2.3 % 

Barack 

Obama 

2.6 % 

0.6 % 

0.3 % 

 
 
Enumeration  

1.8 % 

Intensifiers  

13.8 % 

Phraseological units 

2.8 % 

(fusions, unities, 

combinations) 

162 

1.6 % 

1.9 % 

2.6% 

2.3 % 

2.3 % 

1.5 % 

Metaphor 

4.6 % 

9.1 % 

17.9 % 

(conceptual, 

orientational, 

ontological, 

structural) 

Personification  

0.9 % 

Allusion (cultural, 

7.8 % 

historical,  political, 

and other 

references) 

5.3  % 

12.9 % 

4.5 % 

16.6 % 

Metonymy and its 

1.8 % 

3.8% 

1.3 % 

special cases 

(synecdoche and 

antonomasia) 

Epithet 

19.8 % 

Hyperbole  

6 % 

Irony  

0.6  % 

Rhetorical question 

1.4 % 

9.1 % 

7.6 % 

0.6 % 

0 % 

5.1 % 

4.2 % 

0.3% 

0 % 

 
163 

5.8 % 

0.6 % 

0.6 % 

0.6% 

3.8 % 

0.8% 

0 % 

2.3 % 

Anaphora 

4.6  % 

Epiphora 

2.3  % 

Anadiplosis 

0.9  % 

Framing (slogans 

1.4 % 

that have been 

repeated at the 

beginning and at the 

end of a sentence. 

paragraph or 

throughout the 

speech) 

Parallelism  (partial 

8.3 % 

7.6  % 

12.1 % 

and complete) 

Chiasmus 

Antithesis 

0 % 

0.9 % 

Polysyndeton 

0 % 

Asyndeton 

0.5  % 

pathos 

ethos 

logos 

kairos  

9.2 % 

2.8 % 

0.5 % 

0 % 

0% 

1.5 % 

1.5 % 

0.8 % 

15.2% 

4.5 % 

1.5 % 

2.3 % 

0.6 % 

1.6 % 

2.9 % 

0.6 % 

9.3 % 

2.6 % 

0.6 % 

1.3 % 

 
 
164 

Transcribed and analysed speech 1.  

Bush's pre-election speech 

Transcribed and analysed speech 2.  

Bush's victory speech 

Transcribed and analysed speech 3.  

Trump's pre- election speech 

Transcribed and analysed speech 4.  

Trump's victory speech 

Transcribed and analysed speech 5. 

Obama's pre-election speech 

Transcribed and analysed speech 6. 

Obama's victory speech 

Backgrounds of the speakers.  

Description of all three speakers' cultural backgrounds 

Table 9 
Comparative Analysis of Linguo-culturology and Cultural Linguistics. 

Criteria 

Linguo-Culturology 

Cultural Linguistics 

Aim 

as 

studies 
Linguo-Culturology 
language 
cultural 
a 
phenomenon  (Maslova,  2001). 
It  is  aimed  at  studying  the 
speech,  mental  and  cultural 

Cultural  Linguistics  explores 
between 
interconnection 
language, 
and 
conceptualisation.  It  is  aimed 
the  overall 
at 

improving 

culture 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 

characteristics 
different 
ethnicities, as well as revealing 
of 
meaning 
the 
linguistic 
culturally-loaded 
units 
2006; 
(Vorobyov, 
Maslova,  2001;  Urayimova, 
2020). 
also 
Linguo-Culturology 
focuses  on 
the  systematic 
study  of  both  the  relationship 
and  the  interaction  of  culture 
and  language  in  the process of 
and 
their 
functioning 
(Vorobyov, 
implementation 
2006). 

Linguo-Culturology focuses on 
the  verbal  aspects  of  speech 
(i.e. 
communication 
units, 
phraseological 
metaphors, 
non-equivalent 
phrases  and  others)  and  also 
examines  how non-verbal cues 
(i.e.  intonation,  pitch,  tempo 
and  others)  can  complement 
transmission  of the message in 
regard with cultural norms of a 
or 
particular 
ethnicity. 

nationality 

as 

Language 
phenomenon 
research of such aspects as: 

a 
implies 

cultural 
the 

-  Culturally-loaded  words 

and expressions; 

165 

detailed 

understanding  of  the  cultural 
conceptualization  of  human 
experience. 
The  main  purpose  of  cultural 
linguistics  is  the  systematic 
of 
analysis 
and 
cultural 
conceptualizations 
using methods such as cultural 
schemas 
cultural 
and 
categories 
that  are  directly 
related  to  cognitive  sciences 
and 
linguistics 
cognitive 
(Sharifian, 2017). 

also 

Cultural Linguistics focuses on 
conceptual 
cognitive 
and 
components, 
paying 
the  underlying 
to 
attention 
mental  processes.  Despite  the 
the 
it 
that 
fact 
scientific 
language, 
this 
discipline  cannot  be 
fully 
attributed  to  either  verbal  or 
non-verbal 
of 
methods 
transmitting information. 

studies 

The study of conceptualization 
and  cognition  of  the  world 
of 
through 
as 
language 
interrelated phenomena. 
Further,  as  an  approach  to 
a  person's 
working  with 

concepts 
culture 

the 
and 

Subject of the study 
(verbal / non-verbal) 

Field of research 

 
-  Mythologized  linguistic 
Paremiological 

units 
fund of language; 

-  Phraseological  fund  of 

language; 
-  Standards, 
symbols; 

stereotypes, 

-  Metaphors  and  images 

of language; 

-  Stylistic 

structure  of 

language; 

-  Speech  behavior  (verbal 

behaviour); 
-  Speech etiquette. 

166 

mentality  and  reality,  it is able 
to  reveal  the  full  ideological 
component  of  existing  words 
and 
that  are  mental 
terms 
categories. 
The  model  presented  by 
Sharifian  (2017)  visualizes the 
this 
field  of 
scientific  discipline  and  the 
relationship 
its  main 
of 
components: 

research  of 

-  cultural cognition -> 
-  cultural 

conceptualization 
(cultural 
schemas, 
cultural  categories,  and 
cultural metaphors) -> 
language 
(morphosyntax, 
semantics, 
pragmatics). 

and 

- 

Terminology 

culture, 

cultural 
Language, 
studies,  philology,  linguistics, 
nation, 
ethnicity, 
units, 
culturally-loaded 
phraseological  units,  speech 
image, 
behaviour, 
interpretation. 

language, 
Conceptualization, 
culture, 
categorization, 
cognitive  sciences,  cognitive 
linguistics,  cultural  schemas, 
cultural  categories,  cognition, 
mentality. 

Table 10.  
Comparative analysis of verbal and non-verbal means of communication. 

Criteria 

Verbal communication 

Non-verbal communication 

 
 
 
 
 
Aim 

167 

communication 

Non-verbal 
is 
based  on  the  transmission  of  a 
message  without  using  language, 
and with a focus on gestures, facial 
expressions,  phonetic features, and 
2017; 
(Su  Mon, 
others 
Mammadzada,  2023).  At  the  same 
time,  it  is  crucial  to  distinguish 
between  physiological  movements 
and  information-loaded  ones,  i.e. 
gestures.  The  latter  also  vary  in 
their  meaning, but are traditionally 
associated  with  a  person's  culture 
and nationality. 

and 

Verbal communication is based 
on  the  perception  of  language 
as  a  system  of  signs  and 
meanings,  the  use  of  which  is 
aimed  at  expressing  thoughts, 
ideas  and  emotions  through  a 
(Khasanova,  2024; 
message 
The 
2022). 
Sinelnikova, 
of 
medium 
vary 
transmission 
the 
depending 
communicative goal and who it 
is aimed at. Moreover, this type 
also  varies 
of 
depending  on  the  recipient  or 
decoder,  so  that  it  is  necessary 
for  the  speaker  to  take  this 
aspect 
account 
into 
(Razgonova, ?) 

channel 
may 
on 

interaction 

Subject  of 
study 

the 

Traditionally, 
distinguish 
approaches 
classification 
2022): 

scholars 
main 
two 
to 
speech 
(Sinelnikova, 

1.  external  speech  (occurs 
or 

between 
people 
groups of people); 

the 
Kamola  (2023)  emphasizes 
differentiating 
of 
importance 
between  gestures  and  natural 
human  physiological  movements. 
The  main  criteria  for  successful 
division are the following: 

-  gesture  has  a  signifier  and a 

signified; 

-  written; 
-  oral. 

Both  types  of  external  speech 
can  be  either  monologues  or 
dialogues. 

2.  inner 

speech 
(communication 
takes 
place in a person's mind, 

-  gestures express meaning; 
-  gestures 
meaning. 

can 

change 

(2016) 

proposes 

communication 

Manusov 
a 
classification  of  non-verbal  means 
of 
on 
neurological  factors.  The  author 
highlights  its  connection  with  the 
physical abilities of representatives 

based 

 
168 

of certain nationalities. Thus, there 
are  three  key  types  of  non-verbal 
ways of interaction: 
-  spontaneous 

communication; 
-  pseudo-spontaneous 
communication; 

-  symbolic communication. 

is  considered  part  of  the 
thinking process). 

to  Mammadzada 
According 
(2023), 
there  are  3  main 
manifestations  of verbal means 
of information transmission: 

1.  Dyadic communication; 
groups 
2.  Small 

communication; 

3.  Public communication. 

Field of research  Verbal  communication  model 
identifies the basic units of oral 
that  are  studied 
interaction 
within  the  framework  of  this 
approach (Razgonova, ?): 
information; 

possesses 

- 
-  communication means; 
-  communication network; 
-  communicative activity. 
various 
It 
features, 
manifestations  and 
many  of  which  have 
a 
culturally  determined  meaning 
and  can  be  considered  as  a 
reflection  of  existing  norms  of 
behavior specific to a particular 
nation (Jiang, 2024; Hui, 2017; 
Touaoula, 2017). 

the 

and 

interpret 

Avazova  (2024)  proposes  a  theory 
the  correct  use  of 
regarding 
communication 
non-verbal 
methods,  within  the  framework  of 
which 
“non-verbal 
term 
sensitivity”  was  formed.  It  is  used 
to  denote  the  ability  to  recognize 
the  speaker's  use  of  non-verbal 
them 
signals 
correctly,  taking  into  account  the 
the  message  being 
context  of 
conveyed.  Thus, 
the  following 
units  that  are  studied  within  the 
framework of this approach can be 
distinguished: 
-  encoder; 
-  cultural context; 
-  communicative situation; 
-  decoder. 

At the same time, Manusov (2016) 
notes that having a well-developed 
in  decoding  non-verbal 
skill 
messages  does  not  mean  that  a 
person  can  also  correctly  encode 
such units (and vice versa). 

 
 
 
169 

Terminology 

Verbal  communication,  means 
information, 
of 
transmitting 
medium,  channel, 
language, 
emotionality,  culturally-loaded 
units, speech, encoder, decoder, 
communicative 
means, 
communicative goal. 

transmitting 

Non-verbal communication, means 
of 
information, 
sensitivity,  encoder, 
non-verbal 
cultural 
gesture, 
decoder, 
emotionally-loaded 
background, 
units, 
system, 
communication 
cultural  context,  communicative 
goal. 

 
 
 
