GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY
HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

SCHOOL OF INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

MASTER IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS PROGRAM


MASTER THESIS

Topic: Factors Affecting the Choice of Internationalization Strategies in Art
Business in Foreign Developing Countries Exemplified by Sotheby’s and
Christie’s Auction Houses in China and Saudi Arabia





Student
Maria Rshtuni

Research Advisor 
Nazarov Nikita Romanovich,
Visiting Lecturer



Moscow 2025

Table of Content
Introduction…………………………………………………………..3
Theoretical aspects of the factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries…………………………………………………………..5
Theoretical aspects of the internationalization strategies………...5
Existing research on the internationalization strategies in art business………………………………………………………….12
Existing research on the factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries…………………………………………………………18
Chapter 2. Analysis of the factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developed countries exemplified by Sotheby’s and Christie’s auction houses in Saudi Arabia and China…………………………………………..25
Overview of an art market……………………………………..…25
Case study: Sotheby’s auction house……………………….……32
Case study: Chrisitie’s auction house…………………..…….….41
Chapter 3. Discussion and implications……………………..……48
3.1. Comparative analysis of findings with existing research………..48
3.2 Recommendations for art business managers…………………….55
3.3. Limitations of the study…………………………………….……57
Conclusions…………………………………………………………..61
References……………………………………………………………63





Introduction
Context and motivation. The art market is a unique economic sector that is developing and expanding rapidly over the years. Art itself is mostly associated with subjective, symbolic and non-commercial concepts, but the existence of an art market must be taken into account. This market is also a part of a global system with economic and marketing rules, tendencies and trends. One of these is internationalization, which is relevant because of globalization. Auction houses such as Sotheby’s and Christie’s play a crucial role in the internationalization of the art market, acting as intermediaries between buyers and sellers. In the process of internationalization these auction houses must carefully consider various factors that may impact their choice of a strategy, as long as there are different types of strategies that can help with the expansion. 
It is crucial for both academics and industry professionals to examine and understand the factors that influence the choice of internationalization strategies in the art business. Focusing on Sotheby’s and Christie’s activity in China and Saudi Arabia, this thesis aims to provide valuable insights into how these renowned institutions navigate the complexities of foreign expansion.
Relevance, significance. The topic of this thesis is highly relevant in today’s globalized economy. The art market needs to be studied in depth, as its uniqueness makes it more difficult to predict outcomes and it is highly dependent on cultural differences, nuances and philosophical and psychological aspects of human life. Internationalization strategies are built around the ideas of localization or standardization, which are two ways for any company to expand with its product. In the art market, the question of choosing between these two paths is particularly acute at the moment, which means that there is a need for new studies. What is more, we need to understand, which factors influence the choice of a particular internationalization strategy in foreign developing countries, especially in China and Saudi Arabia, where art business is flourishing.
Research gap. There are not enough studies and research on the subject, as long as it remains a niche and the art market is mostly examined from the point of view of its subjective and spiritual value. When it comes to literature on business strategies, authors tend to focus on more traditional economic sectors. Considering that the art market functions like practically any other sector, we need to study its nuances and explore the factors that influence the choice of strategy.  
Object. Internationalization strategies.
Subject. Internationalization strategies in art business.
Key question. What are the factors that affect the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries?
The main goal. To define factors of the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries.
Tasks. 1. To review relevant literature on business internationalization strategies and the art market characteristics. 
2. To gather data on ways of classification of internationalization strategies. 
3. To provide definitions to ‘art market’ and ‘art business’. 
4. To summarize the internationalization strategies used in the art market. 
5. To research main factors influencing strategic choice for the art market. 
Methodology. Main methods used in the 1st chapter are literature review, comparison, data collection and further analyzes, summarizing. 











Chapter 1. Theoretical aspects of the factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries.
1.1 Theoretical aspects of the internationalization strategies
Globalization is the first and foremost reason for different types of companies in different sectors to adopt internationalization strategies. It is important to use them nowadays because of the need for brands to expand and grow not only in the market of the country of origin, but also worldwide. 
It’s important to note that all internationalization strategies serve the same purpose, which is to create the opportunity for a company to become a leader. Modern leadership can be much more than just a large market share for the company. It is also an existing capacity for innovation, unique technologies, the ability to set promising goals and establish new standards in the field (Yesu, Ganguly, Das, 2022). 
This is particularly relevant to the cultural and creative industries, where the psychological and intellectual aspects of strategic mechanisms are at the core of successful business. Therefore, a deep understanding of strategic mechanisms is inevitable when a company comes to the conclusion to expand outside its home country. 
Before we examine different types of theories of internationalization strategies, it’s necessary to define the phenomenon we are analyzing. The 2020 study ‘Internationalization: An Analysis of 26 Definitions’ gives an overview of what the 26 most common definitions focus on (Lopez Morales, 2020).
Several definitions (e.g. Boddewyn, Andersen, Sun, Graves & Jill) view internationalization as the process of increasing sales or operations abroad. We can therefore define it as the process of increasing international activity by designing or modifying products for foreign markets. There are many theories around internationalization strategies, the main three being the Uppsala model (stage model), the network model, the Resource-Based model and the eclectic paradigm (Roque, Alves, Raposo, 2019). 
Maria R.A. Moreira, Miguel A.S. Maia, Paulo S.A. Sousa, Raquel F.Ch. Meneses offer another perspective on theories, highlighting 6 of them: Internalization Theory, Eclectic Paradigm, Uppsala Theory, Network Theory, Business Strategy and Resource-Based View (2013). Each theory focuses on different reasons that may prevail in the choice of expansion paths for the firm.
The internalization theory focuses on transaction costs and according to it, the company chooses locations to expand its business depending on where the costs are at the lowest (Lejpras, 2009). Eclectic paradigm defines the reasons why firms start the process of internationalization, which include increasing efficiency, expanding capabilities to maintain markets outside their country and different customer and market demands (Andersen, 1993). 
The Uppsala Theory is based on the idea of international expansion in stages. This means that the company first expands into nearby foreign markets and then moves on to more distant places. The key method here is based on behavioral theory, which suggests the existence of natural stages of international development for a company (Johanson, Vahlne, 1977).
The theory of networks focuses on the importance of solidly established and profitable networks. This theory (Cunningham, Culligan, 1991) suggests that networks can be the main reason for a company's internationalization success.
The theory of business strategy is based on the idea that there are a number of factors that a company needs to consider in order to begin the process of international expansion. There may be some external aspects to consider, such as cultural similarities and differences, ease of exporting, government restrictions and market demands. There may also be some internal factors such as product characteristics, company resources and overall experience of a firm in the market (Kim, Hwang, 1992).
The resource-based view argues that the core of internationalization success lies in the first-hand resources of the firm. The flow of internationalization is based on what qualities the firm possesses and in the case of having valuable resources, the firm can have much more advantages in the international market (Wernerfelt, 1994).
Some researchers also suggest a division into three main schools of thought in the international business literature: the first focuses on the costs of internationalization; the second is based on studies of the ‘liability of foreignness’; the third examines the problems associated with controlling operations in other countries (Lopez Morales, 2020). 
Looking through all the theories, we can conclude that there are some basic factors that influence the choice of strategy, based on costs, geographical and cultural nuances, the company's ability to maintain internationalized functioning.
Importantly, the choice of strategy can sometimes be made unconsciously and intuitively (Lu, 2003). At the heart of the choice of internationalization strategy is the question of consumer behavior and market demand. Companies need to consider the political, cultural and social aspects of markets in other countries.
Bartlett and Ghoshal point to two main pressures that drive companies to choose internationalization strategies: the pressure to reduce costs and the pressure to be locally responsive (Bartlett, Ghoshal, 2000). Cost reduction pressures influence the need to mass produce a standardized product in the most optimal location in the world. This kind of pressure is also the reason why companies can outsource some services to other countries where the wage for workers can be much lower. 
Cost pressures are particularly acute for products that serve universal needs. These may be traditional commodities such as oil, copper, sugar, or industrial and consumer products - telephones, batteries, computers. Cost pressures may also be evident for products produced in low-cost locations where there is persistent overcapacity and where consumers are powerful and have low switching costs.
Pressure for local responsiveness can come in a number of ways. The first is differences in customer tastes and preferences. There may also be significant differences in infrastructure and traditional practices. The most obvious examples are different types of sockets in different countries, or left-hand or right-hand driving.
Another pressure is the difference in distribution channels. There are different ways of selling products. Marketing approaches vary from country to country and need to be taken into account when deciding where and how to expand. The demands of the host government may also require the company to be able to maintain an appropriate local presence. Depending on the product, there may be a need for registration, licensing, local clinical trials (e.g. for pharmaceuticals). There is also the threat of protectionism, economic nationalism and local content regulations that require companies to localize.
All of the above differences in these constraints can affect the choice of strategy. Bartlett and Ghoshal propose the matrix model of likely strategies.

Picture 1. The Bartlett and Ghoshal model (AQA, upd. 05.05.24)
There are four strategies in this matrix: 
1) Global standardization strategy. High pressure on cost reduction and low pressure on local responsiveness. 
2) Localization (multidomestic) strategy. High pressure for local responsiveness, but low pressure for cost reduction. 
3) Transnational strategy. High pressure for both cost reduction and local responsiveness.
4) International strategy. Low pressure for both cost reduction and local responsiveness.
The global strategy is based on the principle of maximizing efficiency through coordination and integration. In this case, the company tries to make one big product for the whole world, rather than creating niche products for local zones. Standardization, rather than localization, is the key to achieving operational scale and efficiency. Control and decision making is centralized in the ‘home’ office. Strong centralization is required for a global strategy (Zou, 1996).
The multidomestic strategy is based on the assumption that each local market is unique and requires significant tailoring of products, services, operations and marketing. This strategy requires a high degree of localization, which can be difficult for a company to achieve, but the major benefit is that products and services are very attractive to local markets.
The transnational strategy aims to actively exploit national similarities and differences. It requires a strong and well-marketed core global vision, but adaptation to local markets. This strategy focuses on consistent market positioning and a coherent global image. It seeks to combine the strengths of both multi-domestic and global strategies (Tien, 2019).
The international strategy also involves doing business in several countries. However, there is less integration and coordination than in the transnational strategy. This strategy is based on the transfer of products or services developed in one country to new markets by adapting them to local needs and preferences. To establish a presence in new markets and take advantage of opportunities abroad, international companies may set up subsidiaries or partnerships in other countries (Segal-Horn, 2015).
Another way of classifying the internationalization strategies of firms is to divide them according to the type of activity required to achieve the expansion of the firm. Here we can mention trade strategies, cooperation strategies and investment strategies (Kratko, 2023).

Picture 2. Classification of Business Internationalization Strategies. Presented in the works of I.G. Kratko (2023).
Trade strategies include 'trade in goods' and 'trade in services'. Trade in goods involves importing, exporting and turnkey operations. The last one implies an activity in which the contractor takes on the entire project implementation process – from planning and construction to launch and delivery to the customer – so that the customer can immediately begin operation without additional investment or preparation. Such operations are often used in construction, manufacturing, IT and other areas where it is important to quickly obtain a finished, functioning product or service.
Trade in services involves licensing, franchising, subcontracting or outsourcing. Trade in services and turnkey operations are used for management contracts, engineering, leasing, banking or insurance, transport and tourism. 
Another type of strategy is cooperative strategies, which include strategic alliances without equity participation. Here the main way of internationalization is through contractual JVs: joint production and/or marketing, R&D cooperation and technology exchange, informal alliances.
There are also strategic alliances with equity investment, which can also be a type of investment strategy. These alliances include joint ventures, joint equity swaps, associated companies, satellite companies, minority investment alliances.
Table 1. Classification of strategic alliances with equity investment. Complied by the author from the data from Hubbard (2013).
Investment strategies also include ownership and control strategies, which are the opposite of co-operative investment. These are greenfield operations (subsidiaries, branches, representative offices) and brownfield operations (acquisitions and mergers). Subsidiary is an independent legal entity established and controlled by the parent company, branches are a division of the parent company that does not have the status of a separate legal entity, but carries out business activity, and representative office is intended to represent interests, but not for conducting commercial activities (Athennian, 2021).
So, if we look at the theoretical aspects of the factors influencing the choice of internationalization strategies in the art business in foreign developing countries, we can point out that internationalization is the process of increasing international activity by designing or modifying products for foreign markets. There are main theories called the Uppsala model, network model, business model, eclectic paradigm, internalization theory and resource-based view.
By looking at the main pressures on firms, we can identify global standardization strategy, localization (multidomestic) strategy, transnational and international strategies. Another point of view suggests looking at the strategies from the perspective of the way they are applied, among which we can define trade strategies (e.g. importing, exporting, licensing), cooperation strategies (e.g. joint ventures, strategic alliances) and investment strategies (e.g. greenfield operations, acquisitions). This classification will be taken as a basis for the research.

1.2 Existing research on the internationalization strategies in art business
In recent decades, the art market has been developed and expanded. The main reason for this is a general liberalization of art, which for many centuries was only for rich and high-status consumers. However, the art market is still strongly associated with extraordinary wealth. This is one of the reasons for the high growth rate of the art market: the total value of the art market, including auction sales and dealers, was estimated at $65.7 billion in 2013, with a growth of 154 percent since 2003 (Codignola, 2015).
The art business and the art market are such structures that are strongly based on nuances of cultural, symbolic and subjective ways of perceiving the presented and sold products. We can define the art market as a special socio-economic sphere formed over many decades and associated with the distribution of artistic goods (Koltsova, Starobinskaya, 2019). Art business is based on the economic activity of evaluation and distribution of art objects. It is also a process of managing the production of a cultural service market product, including all structural elements of management (planning, organization, motivation, control) by the organization of people engaged in this production (Kolycheva, 2013).
It shows that the crucial part of the art market is art management. Art management is an independent scientific direction, which has its own subject of research and a number of characteristics that allow it to be distinguished from classical management and economic theory, although it is mostly based on the standard principles (Colbert 2002). We can define it as professional management of the process of creation of artistic values (material and spiritual), promotion of the results of creative activity of authors, directors, performers and organizational efforts of the organization's team on the market of cultural services (Novikova, 2005).
If we examine the historical aspects of the development of the art market, we must point out that the seventeenth century was a particular historical milestone for the art market, as it saw the emergence of a more defined concept of the art dealer - the person who worked as an art manager and helped to distribute goods. For example, it was the time when Hendrik van Eulenburg, who employed Rembrandt in his studio, sold the artist's paintings on his own, and after a while he even created a whole network of sales agents throughout Europe (Colbert, 2002).
Importantly, virtually all of the dealers van Eulenburg worked with were former professional artists. For many, the art trade was a way out of poverty, as they could not live on the income from their paintings. It was therefore a good move for them, because as artists they had the expertise to sell quality goods to the public. At the same time, in 1619, the Parisian Guild of Painters and Sculptors attempted to introduce a statute at the legislative level, according to which only proven artists, i.e. those who had the permission of the Guild itself, could trade (Hulst, 2023). 
In the eighteenth century, the merchant Gavin Hamilton became one of the most famous in the field (Colbert, 2002). His expertise was in the field of ancient sculpture, which he skillfully selected for European aesthetes. In those days, art could even be sold by post: Hamilton would send a sketch of a painting or sculpture to the buyer, who would write back to say whether or not he wanted to buy it. There were risks in this approach, which sometimes led to cancellations once the goods had been delivered to the right country. Nevertheless, almost all dealers of the time used such a system, and the number of successful transactions shows that good taste and professionalism generally enabled quality items to be sold to the right buyers.
As early as the 19th century, the process of trade was greatly simplified, largely due to the arrival of the railways. For example, Ernest Gambar, a businessman and talented 19th-century advertiser, actively used the railways to travel across Europe from artists to clients, from clients to exhibitions, and then back to artists for new creations. An advocate of the globalization of the art market, Gambar sent paintings to the USA as early as 1857.
Foster Capital, which helps companies and start-ups grow their profits globally, points out that the art market operates at the intersection of passion and investment (Foster Capital, 2024). There are some specific current dynamics that need to be taken into account:
1) The nature of globalization. As mentioned, the whole idea of globalization is not new to the art field, but now there are more philosophical and subjective globalization tendencies. There are strong tendencies towards localization and the consideration of smaller cultures.
2) Investment. Art as an asset class is gaining momentum. Investors are diversifying their portfolios with works of art, driving up auction prices and demand for top artists. 
3) Emerging markets. Asian countries such as China and Saudi Arabia have developed significantly in recent years, diversifying and expanding the existing art market. 
4) NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens). In the 2010s, there has been a significant movement towards digital forms of artistic expression, which has led to the establishment of NFT technology, which allows artists to tokenize their work. Although the future of this technology is currently difficult to predict, the art market has already seen the results of this technology, such as Beeple, who made a $69 million sale of an NFT artwork (Foster Capital, 2024).
Art business includes art consulting, appraisals, art brokers, art schools, photography sessions by photographers, tattoo artistry, art financing and others. In the field of art business, any monetary exchange for the purchase of a service or an object that can be defined as a work of art becomes part of an art market activity (Robertson, 2005).
As Iain Robertson points out in his book 'Understanding International Art Markets and Management', the art market is a complex and influential market, still dominated by America and Western Europe. It operates on the basis of the principles of supply and demand, but it is also heavily influenced by human behavior, taste and the institutions that set the values (Robertson, 2005).
Given that the art market is based on the principles of internationalization, it is interesting to take a closer look at the current strategies that can be used in this field. One of the most widely used strategies in the art market is franchising. Franchising makes fine art more accessible to a wider audience.  
One of the main advantages of the franchising strategy is that it facilitates the diversification of art. A franchise in the nation's capital can focus on presenting contemporary art, while a franchise in smaller towns (or even villages) can focus on nature art. In terms of localization, the franchise strategy also helps local artists by giving them more opportunities to present their work. This can be done by commissioning or hosting some programs. 
Different researchers offer different perspectives on the process of franchising in the art market. David Dolan points out that the opening of the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain in 1997 has been widely promoted as a major international museum event, seen as part of the Guggenheim's efforts to build a ‘global museum brand’. (Dolan, 1999). The author examines whether this represents a new era of museum globalization, or just a continuation of past imperial/colonial cultural power dynamics seen in the museum world. 
The global expansion of museums and galleries through franchising raises the question of whether this will lead to increased standardization and corporate control of museums, or allow for greater regional and local representation. Possible consequences of increased museum globalization include a more globalized labor market for museum professionals, pressures for conformity and communication with mass audiences. There are also possibilities for 'reverse colonization', where museum and gallery collections become more internationally diverse.
Greenfield operations are another type of strategy used in the art market. Works of art are considered a valuable and overall large investment, which is used not only by individual buyers, but also by the companies operating in the art market and looking for ways to expand. Thus, in the era of decentralisation of the art market, galleries and auction houses are opening branches in the USA and Europe (Khan-Magomedova, 2013).
Greenfield operations help to establish a new presence for an art business in a foreign country from the ground up. Rather than acquiring an existing art business or gallery, or entering through a partnership or joint venture, it takes the form of establishing a new art business or gallery in a foreign market (Demirbag, 2008).
However, greenfield operations can also present some challenges, as long as starting an art business from scratch in a new country and cultural context requires a significant investment of time, resources and expertise (Demirbag, 2008).
Another common strategy in the art market is mergers and acquisitions. In the art business, this takes the form of acquisitions of galleries and auction houses (Harrillo, 2021). For example, a large company from one country can buy a small gallery in another country, which helps it to enter the local market and gain access to new clients. In 2017, the British auction house Christie's bought an Austrian gallery, Thaddaeus Ropac, which allowed Christie's to expand significantly in the European art market.
Mergers are also very popular among auction houses. When auction houses from different countries merge, they create a much stronger international presence. For example, the merger of Sotheby's and Art Agency, Partners (AAP) in 2016 allowed Sotheby's to enhance its advisory services and strengthen its position in the global art market.
M&A internationalization strategies in the art market can help companies to expand thoroughly and overcome existing barriers by creating alliances with foreign brands and organizations. This type of activity strengthens the competitive position of such companies. However, without careful planning, due diligence and strategic alignment, it can be difficult to achieve success using the M&A model in the art market.
Another type of strategy common to the art market is licensing. This is a strategy whereby artists or art companies grant permission to another party to use the artwork for a specific purpose (Smith, 2022). This is usually done in exchange for a fee or royalties. This strategy helps artists to expand their artistry and reach a much wider audience, while generating additional income and maintaining control over intellectual property rights.
Examples of licensing nowadays are connected to the artworks of famous artists whose pieces became classic. For instance, the iconic painting ‘Starry Night’ by Vincent van Gogh has been licensed for use on a wide range of products including posters, mugs, and phone cases, so it is possible for other brands (Smith, 2022). 
But licensing is also possible for today’s artists who look out for ways to establish their works in the market. Some artists may license their artwork for use in advertising campaigns, films or TV shows or for some type of packaging (Smith, 2022).
As Cheryl Phelps points out, licensing is a $70 billion industry and ‘Art Licensing’ makes up 10% of all licensing. Art licensing is growing every day with a variety of products focused on brands, and identifiable artists being collected by name and style (Phelps, upd. 07.05.2024). Phelps outlines the key steps involved in the licensing process, such as negotiating license agreements, setting royalty rates and enforcing intellectual property rights.
Export and import in the art market refer to the buying and selling the art pieces across international borders. Both export and import play a crucial role in the internationalization of the art business, facilitating the exchange of art pieces between artists, collectors and professionals in the field from different parts of the world (Wang et. al., 2020). This exchange broadens the opportunities for market participants and makes cultural exchange possible and effective. It stimulates economic growth and encourages collaboration between artists and institutions across borders (Wang et. al., 2020).
Looking at the different strategies used in the art market, it can be concluded that by using different methods and approaches, companies are seeking to expand their capabilities. The trend of increasing influence of the Asian sector of the market is noticeable, as strong players are now present in Asian countries. However, the influence of Western countries is still significant, although the trend towards decentralization is undoubtedly present.

Table 2. Internationalization strategies used in art business. Complied by the author from the data from Demirbag (2008), Smith (2022), Harrillo (2021).

1.3 Existing research on the factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries.
When choosing an internationalization strategy, companies in the art market focus on fairly basic factors that are also common to other companies in other fields. Among them: 
1) Demand-oriented factors. The need for artists and arts organizations to internationalize can arise from demands actively dictated by the market. Such demands may be related to cultural trends, economic conditions and changing consumer preferences.
2) Supply-oriented factors. For developed countries expanding to foreign lands can be a way of accessing new and rare art pieces, establishing connections with local companies which possess valuable goods. 
3) Follow-the-customer phenomenon. This is the factor that influences art companies and individual artists to move along with their customers. It requires constant analyzing of trend flows and consumer’s needs. 
4) Follow-the-competitor phenomenon. It is a common practice in the art market for art institutions to follow other prominent participants. This phenomenon significantly impacts the dynamics of the market and is one of the reasons of resource concentration in specific places. 
5) Financial factors. Large multinationals are more likely than smaller companies to be able to take advantage of cross-listing on international stock markets. They may also be able to finance their operations more cheaply because of lower interest rates abroad or higher liquidity in foreign markets. Foreign markets may also offer investment incentives in the form of tax breaks and subsidies (Lobo, 2020).
As can be seen, these factors are based on notions of global dynamics.
According to the United Nations Development Programme’s classification system, China and Saudi Arabia are countries with developing economies. The UNDP’s country classification system is based on the Human Development Index (HDI), which was introduced with the Human Development Report (HDR) in 1990. To capture the multifaceted nature of development, the HDI is a composite index of three indices measuring countries' performance in life expectancy, education and income. Most developing countries have HDI scores under 0.8.
In the study by Maria R.A. Moreira, Miguel A.S. Maia, Paulo S.A. Sousa, Raquel F.Ch. Meneses (2013) researches analyze the internal and external factors that can influence the decision of design, architecture, and engineering consulting firms to operate internationally. This study used a survey of 322 companies. The key findings show that the main determinant for a company to expand internationally is its size: larger firms are more likely to internationalize. It correlates with the idea that less opportunities are present for developing structures (companies, countries and others). Another point is that the number of employees with international experience is also higher in companies that tend to significantly expand. 
The same study also highlights the main barriers to internationalization, among which are protectionism of local technicians, high initial investment costs, and unfamiliarity with foreign markets. Interestingly, firms may perceive international markets as riskier and more expensive, but in a long run it can be more profitable than domestic markets. 
Another important finding of the study is that firms with more managers with university degrees and foreign language skills are more likely to internationalize. This may be due to the fact that the company is oriented towards a globalized way of functioning and presents itself to the market as a company that is open to establishing worldwide connections. 
Another study by T. Mitkus (2016) examines the trends, challenges, and opportunities faced by businesses in the creative sector as they expand globally. The author points out the importance of cultural adaptation, market research, strategic partnerships and leveraging digital platforms in the context of expanding the global reach for art goods and services. This study emphasizes the fact that in the art market understanding of local cultures and consumer preferences drives the choice of the internationalization strategy. 
Technology plays crucial role nowadays in the process of expansion in the art market. Such things as digital platforms and e-commerce services are enabling creative businesses to reach a global audience. T. Mitkus (2016) offers the idea that embracing digital tools and online strategies is crucial for companies in the creative field that are looking to expand their international presence.
Tjosevik and Refsland (2012) offer the perspective on the main factors influencing international entry strategies. The researchers examine how the founder team, market, and product characteristics influence the international entry strategies of firms. It is also connected to the market selection dimensions, entry modes, and overall pace of internationalization. 
Table 3. Factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies. Compiled by the author from the data from the study ‘Factors influencing International Entry Strategies: A Born Global approach.’ Complied by the author from the data from Tjosevik, Refsland (2012). 
The key findings of the study (Tjosevik, Refsland 2012) point out that the founder team is the most influential factor, especially when it comes to founder’s experience and international orientation. These factors are crucial in conditions of a fast internationalization pace.
Product characteristics like its complexity affect entry mode at the global market, with high control modes preferred for more complex products. On the other hand, innovative products enable a faster pace of internationalization for a company. 
J. Zeqiri and B. Angelova’s study of the factors influencing the choice of entry mode confirmed that these factors can be divided into internal and external. Internal factors include firm-specific resources and capabilities, strategic objectives, and organizational and cultural experience. External factors are also important as long as they take the form of market characteristics, cultural and institutional environment, and overall risk and uncertainty. 
As J. Zeqiri and B. Angelova point out in their study, the transaction costs associated with managing and coordinating international operations influence the firm's choice of entry mode. Thus, higher transaction costs may lead firms to prefer internationalization through wholly owned subsidiaries (J. Zeqiri and B. Angelova, 2011). A further study provided a more detailed overview of the reasons why firms may choose to enter a market through acquisition or greenfield entry. The study examined the impact of host country-specific factors, investee firm-specific factors and affiliate-specific factors on the choice of entry mode. The results showed that host country factors such as investment risk, input quality and market potential significantly influence the choice between acquisition and greenfield (Demirbag M. et al., 2008). 
According to the study, the acquisition mode is appropriate when the perceived market potential in the host country is high or when the quality of inputs (e.g. labor, raw materials) in the host country is also high. Greenfield investments are chosen when the host environment poses higher risks or when the foreign investor lacks local knowledge or experience (Demirbag M. et al., 2008). 
Another important mode of internationalization that has been analyzed in the literature is franchising. According to A. Doherty, the motivating factors for choosing this strategy can be divided into two main categories: organizational and environmental. Organizational factors include international retail experience, the availability of financial resources, the existence of a franchisable retail brand, corporate restructuring and development, and the influence of key managers. Environmental factors include opportunistic approaches from potential franchisees, the complexity of local markets, domestic competitive pressures and the availability of suitable franchise partners. Companies choose the franchising strategy primarily because it offers limited financial commitment and exposure compared to other entry modes, the ability to leverage a strong retail brand in foreign markets, and access to local market knowledge and infrastructure through franchise partners. (Doherty A., 2007). 
Another important study was carried out by A. Harrillo Pla in 2021, which focused on trends in the art market and analyzed the case of São Paolo. It found that the art market is increasingly dominated by a small number of major players, creating a ‘market of superstars’ with high inequality. Only a few institutional agents have gained a large market share (Harrillo Pla A., 2021). 
In the context of economic recession and inequality in Brazil, especially in São Paulo, two art gallery owners – Antonio Almeida and Carlos Dale – have adopted an innovative strategy to expand their business: mergers and acquisitions of rival galleries. This allows Almeida and Dale to minimize risk by acquiring galleries and artists that already have established demand and recognition, rather than investing in developing new artists from scratch. This is an interesting approach for galleries to take in times of instability and higher risk (Harrillo Pla A., 2021). Thus, existing studies highlight that larger firms, those with employees with international experience, and firms with managers with higher education and foreign language skills are more likely to internationalize. The qualities of a founder team, market characteristics and product characteristics also may influence the choice of internationalization strategies and also the pace of internationalization for each company.
Also, the mentioned studies focus on the fact that there are crucial for today’s art business points that need to be considered: cultural adaptation, market research, strategic partnerships, and leveraging of digital platforms. 
Overall, the main internationalization strategies used in the art business include franchising, greenfield operations, mergers and acquisitions (M&A), licensing, export and import. 
By understanding these factors, artists, galleries, and other art market participants can make more informed decisions to support international expansion in the art market.


Table 4. Factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries. Complied by the author from the data from Zekiri, Angelova (2011), Demirbag, Tatoglu, Glaister (2008), Doherty (2007), Tjosevik, Refsland (2012).
















 Chapter 2. Analysis of the factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in art business in foreign developing countries exemplified by Sotheby’s and Christie’s auction houses in Saudi Arabia and China.
2.1. Overview of an art market
Currently in 2024 experts suggest the overview of the art market based on the data from the recent years (2020-2023). The main trends and changes as of today have been analyzed with a perspective for 2023. Key conclusions about the market can be drawn based on Art Basel’s ‘Art Market Report 2024’, Artsy’s ‘Art Industry Trends 2024’, and Merril’s ‘Art Market Update’.
As it is stated in the Art Basel ‘Art Market Report 2024’, 2020-2022 were the years when the market showed significant growth, but in 2023 sales slowed down, falling by 4% year-on-year to an estimated $65 billion (Art Basel, 2024). 

Fig.1. The fall in sales in 2023. Complied by the author from the data from Art Basel (2024).
For galleries, this was felt most acutely in the form of rising business costs. In light of this, survey respondents in the overview made by Artsy reported participating in fewer art fairs (39%) and noted that online marketplaces became key to their businesses, both for meeting new collectors and making sales (Artsy, 2024). What is also important, 44% of respondents mentioned cutting administrative and day-to-day expenses and 34% made cuts in gallery marketing budget. 
Against a backdrop of high interest rates, inflation, and political instability, sales were thinner at the top end of the market, and the performance of some of the major art markets diverged. 
Despite the fall in value, the volume of transactions grew in 2023, increasing to 39.4 million (up by 4% on 2022), with the uplift driven by the relative buoyancy of transactions at lower price levels for both dealers and auction houses, and the pullback being mainly at the high end, where volumes tended to be lower (Art Basel, 2024).

Fig. 2. Volume of Sales in the Global Art Market. Complied by the author from the data from Art Basel (2024).
In 2023, both public auction sales and dealer sales experienced a decline, but the decrease in auction sales was more pronounced, dropping by 7%, compared to a 3% drop in dealer sales. However, the impact of this downward trend was mitigated by the injection of postponed 2022 sales in China early in the year. Interestingly, private sales at auction houses bucked the overall declining trend, recording a 2% year-on-year increase.
The United States continued to be the world's top art market, accounting for 42% of sales by value, although this represented a 3% decline from the previous year. China, including Mainland China and Hong Kong, rose to become the second-largest global art market, with its share increasing to 19%. The United Kingdom, in turn, fell back to the third position, capturing a 17% share of the market. France maintained its stable fourth-place standing, holding a 7% market share (Art Basel, 2024).

Fig. 3. Global Art Market Share by Value in 2023. Complied by the author from the data from Art Basel (2024).
Despite the overall decline in the art market, online sales continued to grow, reaching an estimated $11.8 billion in 2023, a 7% increase from 2022. While this figure was lower than the peak of $13.3 billion reached in 2021, online sales still remained nearly double the level observed in 2019 or any prior year. Online transactions now account for 18% of the market's total turnover, underscoring the persistent importance of this sales channel.


Fig. 4. Sales in the Online Art and Antiques Market. Complied by the author from the data from Art Basel (2024).
While there were numerous instances of high-priced transactions in online-only sales, the tendency for the most valuable works to be predominantly sold offline remained. Data from the fine art auction sector in 2023 revealed that, similar to offline sales, the vast majority (over 95%) of transactions in online-only auctions were for prices under $50,000. However, unlike offline sales, which were heavily dominated by value in the $1 million-plus segment, 58% of the value of the online-only fine art auction market in 2023 was attributable to sales at prices less than $50,000, and over 85% was for works sold at under $250,000.
Speaking of auctions, after witnessing some exceptional high-end sales in 2022, public auction sales declined by 7% in 2023, reaching $25.1 billion. This drop was largely driven by a significant thinning of transactions for works priced above $10 million, leading to a sharp decrease in overall value. In contrast, sales in certain middle and lower-priced market segments continued to experience growth during this period.


Fig. 5. Global Public Auction Sales. Complied by the author from the data from Art Basel (2024).
The total sales conducted by auction companies, encompassing both public and private sales, declined by 5% year-on-year, reaching $28.9 billion. However, this figure still remained above the pre-pandemic level observed in 2019.
The US, China, and the UK were still the largest auction markets worldwide in 2023, with a combined share of 74% of public auction sales by value, down by 3% year-on-year.

Fig. 6. Global Public Auction Sales by Value and Region in 2023. Complied by the author from the data from Art Basel (2024).
It is easy to notice internationalization tendencies. One of the main signs of it is Chinese market expansion and overall growth in the Asian part of the global market. The art market has become more global, with buyers and sellers connected worldwide through the internet. This has led to a more transparent market where art can be viewed, purchased, and shipped across multiple borders. For instance, imports and exports of art and antiques have reached record levels, with significant growth in key hubs like Hong Kong, the UK, and the US. 
Another sign of developing internationalization is the fact that there are more branches of the auction houses opening in new countries. Christie’s, one of the world’s leading auction houses, has announced that it will be opening a new branch in Saudi Arabia. This will be the first global auction house to establish a permanent presence in the country (ArtNet News, 2024).
When it comes to the way of finding new clients, galleries view online marketplaces as a more impactful source of establishing connections than art fairs. When asked to select the three most impactful options, respondents who reported an increase in new clients in 2023 selected in-person gallery walk-ins as the most important (55%), followed by online marketplaces (42%) and art fairs (36%).

Fig. 7. Ways for the galleries to meet new clients. Complied by the author from the data from Artsy (2024).
Merril, the company that provides wealth management and financial services, in its Art Market report also states a decrease and describes the mitigation steps that were taken. For example, Sotheby’s has reduced buyer fees and introduced a new fee structure for consignors. It remains to be seen how this will impact auction estimates and transaction costs (Merril, 2024).
The Art Basel Market Report also suggests an outlook on the tendencies of the market in 2024. Thus, dealer views show that 36% of dealers expect an improvement in sales in a form of its increase, 48% of dealers consider it to stay the same, while only 16% predict the decline. The same positive outlook is visible in the auction sector with 38% of mid-tier businesses expecting sales to improve. 
The participants of the global art market are artists and collectors, on the one side, and galleries and auction houses, on another. Artist produce works which are the product of the market, while collectors create the demand through their preferences and investment strategies. For instance, high-profile collectors influence the market by buying specific artists and genres.
Galleries play a pivotal role in advancing artists’ careers, establishing pricing, and managing the availability of artworks in the primary market. They frequently hold exclusive representation agreements with artists and focus on promoting their work to collectors and institutions, for instance, Gagosian and David Zwirner galleries. Auction houses serve as platforms for buyers and sellers to exchange artworks on the secondary market, impacting market trends and pricing. They also facilitate private sales and provide valuable market data and analysis. The interactions and relationships among these key players shape the functioning and dynamics of the art market as a whole.
Major companies on the art market nowadays are Artsy Inc., Saatchi Art, Artspace, Artnet Worldwide Corporation, Sotheby’s, Christie’s International PLC, Singulart, UGallery, Zatista, 1stdibs.com, Inc., Rise Art, Tappan Collective, Minted LLC, ArtFinder, ArtPal, Artsper, Vango Art, Artplode, Contemporary Art Platform, Lumas Gallery, Affordable Art Fair Ltd., Art Basel, Redbubble Ltd., Bluecanvas, Society6 LLC, Behance (Adobe Inc.), Cargo Collective, DeviantArt, Inc., Art.com Inc., Visual Art Network (The Business Research Company, 2025). Here are different types of businesses: auction houses, museums and galleries, marketplaces and fairs. Being located in one particular place, the majority of these companies specializes on selling art online worldwide which means that online sales is one of the most impactful source of profit and establishing connections. 
Artprice made their global ranking of auction houses with Sotheby’s and Christie’s being on the leading positions by sales, far ahead of competitors.


Fig. 8. Global ranking of auction houses by sales. Complied by the author from the data from Artprice (2023).
Overall, it is apparent that the art market had some significant fluctuations during 2023 including the change in sales and also experienced the emerge of some specific trends. It is currently facing some new challenges, which are mostly connected to high interest rates, inflation, and geopolitical instability. 

2.2. Case study: Sotheby’s auction house
Sotheby’s was found in 1744 by Samuel Baker and now is the oldest and largest international fine art auction house. There are 80 Sotheby’s offices globally and the company’s annual worldwide sales turnover is currently in excess of $7 billion (Sotheby’s, 2024). 
Initially it was founded as a book auction business, and its original name was ‘Baker's Great Auction Rooms’. The founder was focused on selling rare books, manuscripts, and academic publications. Later it began expanding beyond books to include art, antiquities, and rare collectibles. Sotheby’s established its reputation for handling prestigious estate sales of aristocratic families in 19th century (Casadesus-Masanell, Wise, 2010). 
In the early 20th century, the auction house started its internationalization, opening branches in major cultural capitals. In 1955 it broadcasted the first international auction on television. It was the time when Sotheby’s began implementing modern marketing and valuation techniques, expanded global network of experts and specialists and developed comprehensive cataloging systems for art and collectibles. 
Since 2019 Sotheby’s is owned by French-Israeli businessman Patrick Drahi. Patrick Drahi bought it as a family business and it is ruled by a specially created American company BidFair US. The deal was $3.7 billion. 
Sotheby’s conducts auctions and private sales in a number of locations around the world. These include major cities such as New York, Los Angeles, London, Paris and Hong Kong. This global presence enables the company to cater to a diverse client base and to present a wide range of art and collectibles to an international audience. 
Sotheby’s utilizes online bidding platforms to create more opportunities for customers around the world. It is possible to take part in live auctions online. This digital infrastructure is one of the main Sotheby’s instruments in terms of internationalization. 
To promote its auctions around the world, Sotheby’s employs an effective marketing strategy based on its core values and characteristics. The branding of Sotheby’s is built on principles like high-class expertise, uniqueness, masterpieces, customer service. 
Sotheby’s is also aware of the level of increasing competition not only from the same time-honoured auction houses, but also from newer internet-based organizations (Artsy, ArtNet). For this reason, the organization is actively involved in developing various innovative solutions for its business. In 2018, the company acquired the startup ThreadGenius, which enables more accurate site search and recommendations for users. Such a contribution to the development of a better online environment speaks of Sotheby’s commitment to maximizing results. Indeed, Sotheby’s online and multichannel bidding contributed to 18% of global art sales in 2023. 
Already, Sotheby’s is developing an omnichannel approach so that customers can have a positive experience when they turn to online shopping. This is demonstrated through the use of BidNow technology, which allows buyers to bid in RealTime while watching an auction live. By combining the live and virtual, Sotheby's creates a positive experience for its customers. In 2023, online platforms (such as BidNow) accounted for 18% of total global art market sales, reaching $11.8 billion in value, with Sotheby’s standing out as a key contributor (ArtBasel, 2024).
However, in September this year Sotheby’s reported the drop in its earnings, which fell down by 88% during the first half of 2024 (ArtNews, 2024). It was also mentioned that the auction sales fell by 25% (Financial Times, 2024). Experts say that the main reason for this is the decline in demand from China, which became a key market for Sotheby’s today (Artlyst, 2024). As a result, Sotheby’s decided to turn to its fund in Abu Dhabi and secured a $1 billion investment from ADQ (Abu Dhabi’s sovereign wealth fund) (ArtNews, 2024). The fund has committed to acquiring a minority equity stake in the auction house. 
Importantly, Sotheby’s spokesperson highlighted that $800 million of the cash has been used for paying down auction house’s long-term debt (as of today, it’s $1.65 billion). Part of the money will be used to support its aggressive expansion plans, both in terms of property in the US and abroad, and the development of new markets and revenue streams (ArtNews, 2024).
It its press release Sotheby’s mentioned that the acquired money from the ADQ would help build “an even stronger presence in the Middle East, as Abu Dhabi continues to strengthen its arts and culture offerings domestically” (ArtNews, 2024). While all this was going on, Sotheby’s successfully opened a new office in France in October, 2024 (Sotheby’s, 2024), as well as a luxury flagship in Hong Kong (Artsy, 2024). 
In October 2024 ArtNet reported that Sotheby’s auction results show the rise of more caution on the art market. As the experts noticed, Sotheby’s total was down by 20% and the auction houses concentrated on the older generation of artists instead of pushing ultra-contemporary stars, as it did in previous years (ArtNet, 2024). 

Table 1. A Breakdown of Results from Sotheby’s London Contemporary Evening Sale, October 2024. Complied by the author from the data from ArtNet (2024).
This shows that Sotheby’s is being more cautious with its auctions at the moment and is also paying attention to other areas, trying to maximize profit from all its segments. As a result, the auction house was beaten by Christie’s, which generated nearly $1.6 billion in fine-art sales (ArtNet, 2024).

Fig. 9. Fine Arts Total Sales (USD, billion) by Sotheby’s and Christie’s. Complied by the author from the data from ArtNet (2024).
When it comes to the internalization strategies that Sotheby’s has adopted in recent years, it’s important to note its efforts in the East, particularly in Hong Kong. In 2023 Sotheby’s was reported to be ‘putting down the roots’ in the region. Previously for two decades the auction house had been holding sales in rented premises only twice a year. Sotheby’s has now opened a multi-purpose space where auctions can be held throughout the year (The Art Newspaper, 2024). 
Hong Kong is an important destination for Sotheby’s, as long as previously in 2023, the sales of Chinese art rose up to 9%, as the country regained its position as the world’s second-largest art market. In 2024, the city government is pursuing a special policy that increased the duty-free import limit for mainland visitors from 5,000 to 15,000 yuan (from $689 to $2,068) per trip to attract more shoppers from across the border, as CNN reports (CNN, 2024). 
Eileen Kinsella, vice president for client strategy at Sotheby’s, said, that their plan was to open two-floor space where both exhibitions and auctions can be held (ArtNet, 2024). As a result, this project is an innovative concept. Sotheby's Hong Kong flagship combines museum exhibitions, auctions and offers a unique retail experience.
Sotheby’s has long been developing its presence in the eastern market. It was the first auction house to open offices in Beijing and Shanghai. Sotheby's has a comprehensive program of expansion in Asia, with the primary aim of providing valuable resources for local clients. The Chinese offices offer expertise in fine and decorative arts, jewelry, watches and wine.
In the interview to ‘The Observer’ Felix Kwok, Head of Modern Art, Sotheby's Hong Kong, shared the key insights that accompany the organization’s eastward expansion. He noted that the company's rise in the region is largely due to fostering client loyalty and engagement, although this is only one of the success factors. Kwok recognizes that the best strategy is to create quality storytelling that presents Sotheby's to new clients as both a credible, experienced player and sufficiently 'cool' and accessible to the younger generation. As Kwok points out: “We are constantly trying to push our boundaries for the aesthetic and storytelling to create excitement, inspiration and new opportunities” (The Observer, 2024). 
As Sotheby’s expands in Asia, Kwok focuses not only on introducing the public to contemporary Western art, but also on internationalizing contemporary Asian art. In the process of Sotheby’s eastward expansion, the main mission is the mutual exchange of various art objects.
The pivot to the Asian market has been crucial for Sotheby's in principle, because this is what currently allows the organization to develop and take a leading position (South China Morning Post, 2024). This is a general trend for all auction houses. The strategy of opening new headquarters and galleries has a key objective, namely to attract the ultra-wealthy in order to counter the economic downturn in China and increase its sales in Asia (CNA Luxury, 2024). 
Franchising is another important means of internationalization for Sotheby’s. Franchising is relevant to a Sotheby’s International Realty, a division of the auction house. This agency offers services in the sale of various elite and prestigious properties. Sotheby’s International Realty has an international network of agents and brokers, giving clients access to different properties on the market in different countries. 
Sotheby’s International Realty was founded in 1976 as a property service for clients of the Sotheby's auction house. The company now has more than 1,100 offices in 83 countries, including 48 of its own brokerage offices. In 2004, Anywhere Real Estate Inc. entered into an agreement with Sotheby’s to create a franchise system. Each office is independent and receives operational, marketing and business support. 
The affiliate network is managed by Sotheby’s International Realty Affiliates LLC and the in-house brokerages are managed by Sotheby's International Realty, Inc. Both entities support the principles of the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Opportunity Act (PR Newswire, 2024).
One of the remarkable milestones for the Sotheby’s International Realty was the opening of the first affiliated office in Saudi Arabia in 2023. In recent years the new offices were also opened in South Korea, Poland, Paraguay. 
As Sotheby’s International Realty expands globally, it also offers new and exclusive opportunities for clients. Under the leadership of George Azar in the Middle East, a new service for ultra-high-net-worth clients and multi-family offices, The Family Office, was launched in 2024. This service combines access to prestigious properties, luxury goods and assets, investment and legal advice. China's swift economic expansion has resulted in a notable rise in high-net-worth individuals (HNWIs), fueling a strong demand for luxury real estate, as well as in Saudi Arabia (Juwai, 2017).
The Family Office, led by Marcus O’Brien, will be a single point of contact for UHNW clients, providing an exclusive and personalized service. Clients will be able to confidentially buy and sell high quality assets not available on the open market.
With the launch of The Family Office, the company aims to create ‘lasting value’ for UHNW clients and strengthen its relationship with them in the GCC region through its franchise model and operations in Dubai and Saudi Arabia (The National, 2024). 
Here the internalization in Saudi Arabia has to be discussed particularly, as long as it shows how Sotheby’s uses the strategy that is based on direct foreign investment (FDI) and the establishment of a local branch. The official press release made in November 2024 states that Sotheby's officially registered its company in Saudi Arabia at the end of 2024 (Sotheby’s, 2025). This means that the company has established a legal entity in the country, rather than operating through a franchisee or partnership. 
An office will be opened in Riyadh, in the famous Al Faisaliah Tower which confirms Sotheby's long-term intentions to strengthen its presence. The first auction was held on February 8, 2025 in the historical center of the country. The event recorded total sales of $17.28 million, with 67% of lots sold and 74% of the overall value realized, which is an impressive beginning (The Artnewspaper, 2025). Sotheby’s has been actively involved in Saudi Arabia’s cultural initiatives for several years, but now there is a significant shift to the full-time work in the region. 
Last year was therefore a challenging one for Sotheby’s, but this did not prevent the auction house from actively promoting itself in the promising markets of the Middle East and Asia. Eileen Kinsella, vice president for client strategy at Sotheby’s noted: “That’s not to say that this year hasn’t been without its challenges, but over the course of our 280-year history, we have always found ways to adapt. Innovation has always been a part of our DNA. Even in the midst of a changing market recently, for instance, we introduced a lower buyer’s premium, and we are already seeing a positive impact – strong demand, high sell-through rates, and increased auction participation. There are so many exciting things coming, too, especially with the opening of our new buildings in Paris, Hong Kong, and New York. We are no strangers to having to innovate to thrive” (ArtNet, 2024). 
Looking at the reasons for the chosen internationalization strategies it is possible to see some important patterns that influence the auction house’s direction towards Asia and Middle East, China and Saudi Arabia in particular. When it comes to China, the main reason is the rapid growth of the art market in this country. As it was stated previously, now Chinese art market (Hong Kong included) makes around 19% of the whole global art market. Promising numbers and convenient policies make China a really good part of the market for Sotheby’s. 
The same is visible in the context of Saudi Arabia as long as this country is no longer a closed and distant market. Now Saudi Arabia is considered to be the new epicenter for the art that takes forms in auctions and exhibitions (Property of a Lady, 2025). Between 2019 and 2023, the number of Saudi buyers increased by 74%, and bidders by 125% (The Artnewspaper, 2024).
Another reason of the expansion here for Sotheby’s is the Abu Dhabi funding which led to the strengthening of the connections between Sotheby’s and Middle East. 
Sotheby’s uses direct investments and the opening of branches in countries with growing demand for art and luxury goods. These strategies allow you to gain a foothold in promising markets, build trust through physical presence, minimize the risks of an economic downturn, compete with Christie’s and other players on the market. China and Saudi Arabia are logical areas for Sotheby’s growth in a precisely turbulent art market. 

Table 2. Factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in foreign developing countries exemplified by Sotheby’s auction house. Complied by the author from the data from Artlyst (2024), ArtNews (2024), CNN (2024), The Observer (2024), PR Newswire (2024), The National (2024), Property of a Lady (2025).

2.3. Case study: Christie’s auction house
Christie’s Auction House is also one of the leading houses in the art market. It was founded in 1766 in London by James Christie’s. In 1823, the main office, which is located in King Street, was established and in 1975, an additional office was opened in South Kensington. Currently, Christie's has several offices in major cities around the world, including New York, Moscow, Milan, Hong Kong and others. 
Although the house conducted some international sales, its influence and operations remained largely localized for a long time. Initially Christie’s lagged behind Sotheby’s in the process of internationalization. It was not until 1977 that Christie's opened its first site in New York. The opening of the American site allowed Christie’s to attract new clients and establish links with collectors in the USA. By the end of the 1980s, Christie’s had already caught up with Sotheby’s in terms of international sales.
In the 1990s, Christie's continued to expand its operations into other countries, including Asia. In 1994, the company held its first auctions in Hong Kong, which opened access to new clients in Asia, where interest in Western art and antiques had grown significantly.
Christie’s has adapted its strategies to specific markets. For example, in Asia, the auction house began to take into account local cultural specificities and customer preferences. For this purpose, catalogues and auction offerings were adapted to focus on what might be of interest to Asian audiences: special antiques, Chinese art, and works by local contemporary artists. To expand its position in the Asian market, Christie’s worked with local galleries, museums and art historians to reach a wider audience and improve its understanding of the market.
In the process of its internationalization, Christie’s also focused on acquisitions and mergers: in 1973 Christie's acquired the Canadian auction firm Jacoby’s of Montreal. Later in 1998, the French company Groupe Artémis, owned by François Pinault, bought Christie’s, so it is still a private company owned by François Pinault.
With the advancement of technology, Christie’s began to utilize online auction platforms, paving the way for a wider reach to clients around the world. Christie’s has a functioning bidding platform that makes it possible for clients to participate in an auction from any part of the world. Now this platform, called Christie’s LIVETM, has been extended to the mobile app (Christie’s, 2024). 
In order to bring online auctions to a wider audience, Christie’s also regularly holds online-only auctions, where participation is available for a limited time, typically between 14 and 21 days. Users can bid at any time during the auction. The platform also includes features such as a countdown clock and automatic bid extensions when new bids are placed in the last minutes of the auction. Between 2020 and 2022, more than 40% of online buyers were new clients, with many coming from emerging regions such as Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America. Moreover, in 2023, Christie’s generated over $250 million in sales from online-only auctions (Businesswire, 2022).
Overall, Christie’s, like other auction houses in the marker, currently is going through some critical financial and economic challenges. ArtNet reports that Christie’s faced a 22% drop in its sales, which was mostly caused by the “challenging macroeconomic environment,” as the auction house’s chief executive officer, Guillaume Cerutti, told reporters on July 6 (ArtNet, 2024). 
The UK market has been particularly hard hit, falling 26% over the past year. These changes are largely due to the political situation, Brexit, the weak pound and high inflation. As a result, Christie's cancelled its June sale in London in May this year (ArtNet, 2024). 
As noted above, Christie’s generated nearly $1.6 billion in art sales in the first half of the year, beating Sotheby’s by $116 million. The house’s haul represents a 28.2 per cent drop on the same period last year (Fig. 8). Christie’s announced that 41% of buyers were based in Americas, 38% in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, and 21% in Asia. The number of Asian buyers fell by 5% compared to the first half of 2022, dropping from 26% to 21%. This figure was much higher in 2021, at 39% (Artnews, 2024). 
Now Christie’s, just like Sotheby’s, is actively promoting itself in the Asian market. In September 2024, a new headquarters was opened in Hong Kong. As Christie’s CEO Guillaume Cerutti pointed out, “The opening of Christie’s new Asia Pacific headquarters is a milestone moment in our 250-year history and reflects the integral and influential position the region holds in the global art and luxury market” (Christie’s Press Centre, 2024). 
It is worth noting that the launch of Christie’s took place against the backdrop of the opening of Sotheby’s new space – in this respect the two organisations are preparing for significant competition in the region. Despite the economic downturn caused by property market problems and increasing cultural censorship in both Hong Kong and mainland China, these regions remain a significant market for auctions. Buyers from Asia Pacific accounted for 28% of Christie's sales in 2023 and 21% in the first half of this year (Artnews, 2024).
Also in September, Christie's opened its first representative office in Saudi Arabia, marking the company’s development in the Middle East. Christie’s was the first international auction house to be granted a permanent commercial license to operate in Saudi Arabia. The new expansion in Saudi Arabia is in line with Christie’s aim to focus on contemporary Middle Eastern art (Artnews, 2024).
It's notable that here the glocalization strategy is used which takes form of global presence and local adaptation. In Christie’s case with Saudi Arabia the company uses its international reputation and experience, but adapts the business to the specifics of a particular market. 
This manifests in a legal presence, as long as Christie’s obtains a commercial license in Saudi Arabia that allows it to work directly with clients, rather than through partners or branches in other countries. However, Christie’s also considers a local management. The appointment of Nour Kelani, Christie’s Managing Director, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, who has experience in the Middle Eastern art market, helps to take into account local cultural and business specifics. Following the launch of the Saudi office, consignments coming from Saudi Arabia rose by more than 20% in subsequent auction cycles, resulting in increased sales volumes (Christies, 2024).
Participation in the Diriyah Biennale and the organization of exhibitions of Saudi artists shows adaptation to the cultural context of the country (Christie’s, 2024). The Company focuses not only on existing collectors, but also on a new generation of Saudi art buyers (Christies, 2024). 
Thus, Christie’s does not just export services, but builds a local ecosystem, fitting into the cultural and economic realities of the Saudi Arabia. This is a classic strategy of globalization, when a global brand adapts to the peculiarities of the local market without losing its identity.
Christie’s also employs a collaborative strategy, as with its merger with China Guardian Auctions during the coronavirus pandemic. Christie’s and China Guardian Auctions have teamed up for a series of sales and exhibitions called 2020+ in September 2020. This, as they said, was the first collaboration of its kind between auction houses in Shanghai which aimed to expansion of the market in the region (The Art Newspaper, 2020). Reuters reported significant rise in young Chinese collectors, particularly interested in Chinese works of art and paintings (Reuters, 2024).
Like Sotheby’s, Christie’s is actively developing real estate franchising. Christie’s International Real Estate, partly owned by Christie’s, is also an international network of independent luxury real estate firms with more than 400 offices and approximately 10,000 agents in nearly 50 countries and territories around the world.
Christie’s International Real Estate has expanded its presence in the Alps through a partnership with Regent Alps in 2024, a brokerage firm serving Les Jeux and the Port du Soleil region. Founded in 2023, Regent Alps provides luxury real estate sales, property management and project development services.
The partnership with Christie’s increases sales visibility for Regent Alps’ clients by providing access to a global referral network and high-end marketing platform. Interest in Les Jeux is growing among international buyers as it seeks to attract wealthy clients from Asia and the Middle East (Abode2, 2024).
The Asia-Pacific region has significant growth potential, which was highlighted by the opening of Christie's International Real Estate's new Vietnam office in Ho Chi Minh City in spring of 2024. With a diverse economy, active foreign investment and a rapidly growing luxury property sector, Vietnam has the potential to become a key player in the wider Southeast Asian property market (Luxury Defined, 2024).
Christie’s is thus actively pursuing development and expansion through various avenues in the international marketplace. Despite the economic difficulties, the auction house is actively entering new areas and competing successfully with Sotheby’s, as long as it takes into account the variety of important internationalization strategies, such as glocalization, foreign direct investment, franchising, mergers & acquisitions and the development of an online presence. 
The reason behind these strategies and the fact that Christie’s is expanding to Chinese and Saudi Arabia’s markets is the already mentioned growth of these segments and an overall weakening of the position of Western markets. Asian and Middle Eastern collectors are actively entering the market and most of the buyer’s centers are located in China and Saudi Arabia. Younger generations of buyers in China and Saudi Arabia are interested in both contemporary art and luxury goods. Christie’s strives to consolidate its position in key regions and attract new customers.
Christie’s internationalization strategies are aimed at risk diversification, adaptation to economic realities, and growth in the most promising regions. The company chooses localization, direct investments, partnerships and digitalization to strengthen its leadership in the changing global art market. 


Table 3. Factors affecting the choice of internationalization strategies in foreign developing countries exemplified by Christie’s auction house. Complied by the author from the data from Christie’s (2024), Christie’s Press Centre (2024), Artnews (2024), The Art Newspaper (2020), Abode2 (2024).




















Chapter 3. Discussion and implications

3.1. Comparative analysis of findings with existing research
After conducting a theoretical analysis of the literature and a practical examination of the internationalization strategies of auction houses, it is necessary to bridge the theoretical frameworks with the empirical findings. By aligning this study’s practical observations with established theories this analysis evaluates the extent to which these auction houses’ approaches conform to or diverge from academic expectations. ;
Table 1. Comparative framework. Complied by the author.
This structured comparative framework highlights how well-established internationalization theories apply to the unique practical dynamics of the art auction market, while also identifying an area where practice extends from theoretical implication. 
First, the framework illustrates how institutional factors specific to the art world, particularly the tension between cultural prestige and commercial considerations, reshape traditional internationalization strategies and approaches. Instead of following standard models that predict a staged market entry (Uppsala’s incrementalism) or a matrix of strategic choices (Bartlett & Ghoshal’s global, multi-domestic, transnational, or international strategies), auction houses demonstrate strategic flexibility. They focus on transnational approach as a very convenient mix of approaches. 
The empirical findings support the transnational strategy framework (Bartlett and Ghoshal, 2000), demonstrating its effectiveness in the art auction sector. Sotheby’s and Christie’s have successfully implemented this approach by maintaining their strong global brand identity through heritage marketing, such as Christie’s 250-year legacy campaigns, while also adapting to local markets with specialized offerings, such as Sotheby’s hiring of Islamic art experts for Saudi auctions and Christie’s development of Middle Eastern-themed sales. The case studies are partially aligned with the Uppsala Model’s (Johanson & Vahlne, 1977) premise of gradual internationalization, as seen in Sotheby’s phased expansion to China. 
However, both auction houses deviated from this model’s linear progression in Saudi Arabia, entering with high-commitment investments (e.g., permanent offices), due to strategic and competitive urgency. This highlights how competitive pressures can accelerate the internationalization process in oligopolistic markets, shortening traditional timelines.
The strategic focus of Sotheby’s and Christie’s on China and Saudi Arabia illustrates how market characteristics influence the internationalization of the art industry. This alignment, informed by the work of Tjosevik and Refsland (2012), provides both a theoretical basis and an understanding of the nuances that are specific to the art market. Both auction houses demonstrate an exemplary response to the peculiarities of the market:
1) China’s strategic priority
Market size: 19% of the global art market (2nd largest after the USA)
Political leverage: Using increased duty-free import limits to China (¥15,000) to attract cross-border buyers (Chapter 2.2)
Step-by-step commitments: Sotheby's 20-year journey from leased auction space to permanent flagship in Hong Kong follows and surpasses the stages of Uppsala
2) Saudi Arabia’s emergence
Prestigious economy: A physical presence (for example, Christie's office in Riyadh) serves to strengthen the brand in addition to the immediate return on investment
Oligopolistic dynamics: Almost simultaneous market entry (flagships in Hong Kong opened a few weeks apart in 2024) reflects the Lobo phenomenon (2020) ‘follow the competitor’
Digital enhancement: Online sales (18% of global art transactions) ensure rapid scaling despite high FDI commitments
The need for cultural adaptation in internationalization strategies, as emphasized by Garcia (2012), finds convincing confirmation in the approaches of Sotheby’s and Christie’s in emerging markets. Where traditional industries can standardize offerings, the art business has to focus on deep cultural nuances, balancing global prestige and hyperlocal relevance. 
The internationalization trajectories of Sotheby’s and Christie’s convincingly illustrate Wernerfelt’s (1994) resource-based point of view, showing how financial capital and institutional networks accelerate global expansion in the art sector. Both auction houses used their resource advantages to overcome market entry barriers and implement aggressive growth strategies. Their examples show how auction houses use the three key resources identified earlier: financial reserves to enter a risky market, specialized human capital (such as regional art experts), and institutional networks built up over decades of elite client relationships. 
The concentrated structure of the art auction market, dominated by Sotheby’s and Christie’s, is a textbook case of oligopolistic competition, when strategic decisions are inextricably linked to the actions of competitors. Lobo’s thesis (2020) about ‘following the competitor’ finds striking confirmation in the simultaneous expansion of houses to Hong Kong and Saudi Arabia in 2024. Within a few weeks of each other, both firms opened flagship headquarters in the Asia-Pacific region in the corridor of luxury stores in Hong Kong. This mirrored escalation continued in Saudi Arabia, where Sotheby’s quickly responded to the approval of Christie’s commercial license (ARTnews, September 2024) by announcing the opening of an office in Riyadh with the support of ADQ (November 2024). 
Mitkus’ (2016) claim that digital platforms help overcome geographical constraints in the creative industries has not only been confirmed, but has also been significantly surpassed by the digital transformation of Sotheby’s and Christie’s. If theory predicted that digital tools would complement physical auctions, then the technological investments of these houses have dramatically changed market access and buyer behavior. The Christie's LIVE™ platform and Sotheby's multichannel bidding system accounted for 18% of global art sales in 2023 (Art Basel 2024), an indicator that not only smoothed the recession of the pandemic, but also established online sales as a permanent and fast-growing channel.
The discrepancy with Mitkus’ expectations is most obvious in how the introduction of digital technologies has allowed us to create a market, rather than just enter it. When Christie’s sold Basquiat for $14.6 million at an online auction in 2023 (ArtNet), it demonstrated price thresholds that were previously considered impossible outside of physical trading floors. Similarly, the Sotheby’s NFT market (launched in 2021) has formed an entirely new demographic of collectors, accounting for 9% of contemporary painting sales in 2023. The digital leap of the art market represents a paradigm shift: in cultural sectors, technological innovation does not follow internationalization, but leads it.
Garcia’s (2012) concept of how the host country’s policy defines the ways of internationalization finds convincing confirmation in the contrasting but equally strategic approaches of Sotheby’s and Christie’s to the regulatory environment. Whereas in traditional industries, government policy can be seen as a simple obstacle to meeting requirements, auction houses have turned it into a competitive advantage through subtle adaptation.
In China, Sotheby’s demonstrated its mastery of political arbitrage by adapting to the government's decision to increase the duty-free import limit for 2023, from 5,000 to 15,000. Christie’s expansion into Saudi Arabia represents an even more complex case of regulatory entrepreneurship. Having received the first-ever commercial license granted to an international auction house (ARTnews 2024), Christie’s did not just comply with Saudi rules – it actively shaped them.
Thus, the internationalization strategies of Sotheby’s and Christie’s demonstrate the dynamic interaction of theory and practice, where traditional frameworks are both confirmed and overcome. While Uppsala’s ‘gradualism’ and Bartlett and Ghoshal’s transnational matrix explain the underlying patterns, the art market introduces critical nuances: competitive mimicry speeds up deadlines, digital platforms rewrite geographical boundaries, and political arbitration becomes the core competence.



3.2 Recommendations for art business managers
An empirical analysis of the internationalization strategies of Sotheby’s and Christie’s allows to draw conclusions that will be useful to art market professionals seeking global expansion. 

Table 2. Recommendations. Complied by the author.
In these recommendations, the theoretical conclusions from chapter 1 and the empirical results from chapter 2 are translated into a tactical action guide. For the art business, successful internationalization depends on:
Rejection of false dichotomies (global versus local) in favor of adaptive hybridity;
The perception of digital tools as a strategic imperative rather than a convenience;
Treating competition as intelligence that allows you to enter the market quickly.
By adopting these strategies, managers will be able to replicate the success of market leaders while avoiding their mistakes, especially in balancing short-term pressure and long-term retention of brand equity. It is also important to develop an implementation roadmap, which is presented below. 

Table 3. Implementation roadmap. Complied by the author.
The globalization of the art market is neither linear nor uniform. Success requires adaptive hybridity – the dual ability to leverage institutional heritage while embracing disruptive innovation. 

3.3. Limitations of the study
Although this study provides valuable information on the internationalization strategies of leading auction houses, it is necessary to recognize several important limitations in order to correctly interpret the results obtained and guide future research in this area.
1) Market representativeness: Exceptional attention to Sotheby’s and Christie’s operations in China and Saudi Arabia, while providing rich qualitative data, creates problems for broader generalizations. These markets represent unique cases – China with its state-influenced art sector and complex regulatory environment, and Saudi Arabia with its rapid cultural liberalization under the Vision 2030 program. These conditions are significantly different from other emerging markets such as India or Brazil. Future research may enhance external validity by examining expansion patterns in more diverse geopolitical and economic contexts.
2) Time limits: The study period is 2020-2024. It covers important events, including post-pandemic recovery and major geopolitical shifts, but the long-term sustainability of the observed strategies remains uncertain. Key initiatives such as Sotheby’s $1 billion investment in Abu Dhabi or Christie’s digital transformation require a long evaluation period to determine their true profitability and sustainability. Longitudinal studies tracking these changes over 5-10 years would provide more accurate data on which approaches create sustainable competitive advantages.
3) Limited data: Reliance on publicly available information such as auction results, press releases, and corporate statements inevitably limits the depth of analysis. The most important internal indicators that could reveal the finer nuances of strategic decision-making remain unavailable: the breakdown of profitability by region, internal risk assessment systems, the real costs of attracting customers and unsuccessful attempts to enter the market. For example, the cancellation of the 2024 Christie’s London sale reveals important counter-propaganda ideas that are often suppressed in public reports. Future research may include interviews with executives, leaked documents, or privileged industry partnerships to uncover these hidden aspects.
4) Sector specifics: The focus on high-end auction houses, although suitable for studying market leaders, may not fully correspond to other segments of the art market. Some galleries such as, for example, Gagosian operate on fundamentally different models of private sales, while digital technology-based platforms such as Artsy prioritize scalable technologies rather than physical market penetration. Even in the auction sector, regional players such as Poly Auction in China or Phillips in Southeast Asia may take different approaches to internationalization. Subsequent research should check to what extent the identified strategies are applicable in this broader ecosystem.
5) Theoretical coverage: Despite the fact that the study effectively applies established theories of internationalization, it may underestimate the unique factors of the art market that do not fit into the generally accepted framework. The excessive influence of ‘star artists’ on market entry decisions, the role of non-economic motives such as cultural diplomacy, and the influence of speculative investment models are all poorly understood variables that could enrich future theoretical models. The revised system may include concepts such as ‘prestige payback’ or ‘cultural capital accumulation’ to better reflect this dynamic.
6) Methodological considerations: A qualitative approach to the study of specific cases, although ideally suited to identify strategic nuances, inevitably sacrifices some quantitative accuracy. For example, we cannot definitively determine whether digital platforms contribute 25% or 35% to international growth, or statistically isolate the impact of a glocalization strategy on sales figures. Research based on mixed methods and combining in-depth case analysis with quantitative analysis of auction data in different markets will help to eliminate this gap.
These shortcomings, although significant, do not detract from the research contribution, but rather outline a clear path for future research. The priority next steps should be: expanding comparative examples to include regional auction houses and galleries; developing partnerships to gain access to industry-specific data; creating art-specific performance indicators; and creating a more nuanced theoretical framework that takes into account the dynamics of cultural capital. By addressing these issues, scientists and market analytics will be able to develop a more comprehensive understanding of the globalization of the art market – one that balances academic rigor with the unique commercial and cultural realities of the sector. The present study lays a solid foundation for this work by systematically mapping the complex interaction of theory and practice in one of the most distinctive sectors of the global economy.























Conclusions
A general overview of the art market shows a marked decline in sales. At the same time, the US remains the largest art market, accounting for 42% of sales, followed by China with 19% and the UK in third place with 17%. Online sales in particular have continued to grow, and auction houses are now actively developing this area. 
Overall, the Middle East and Asia are proving to be particularly important for auction houses at the moment. These areas now appear to be the most promising in terms of financial and economic development. Sotheby’s and Christie’s are betting on Hong Kong, opening new offices there and promoting Chinese art in general.
In terms of internationalization strategies, it is important to note that in the context of Sotheby’s it is relevant to attract funds and financial cooperation with them. Sotheby’s is also actively developing its real estate franchise network through Sotheby’s International Realty, which complements the strength of its international positioning.
In this sense, Christie’s strategies are in line with those of Sotheby’s – the organisation also relies on franchising as part of its real estate project. However, Christie’s is also pursuing an acquisition strategy, including the purchase of Gooding & Company, which strengthens its position in the growing classic car segment. Christie's also focused on the art market in the Middle East and Asia, opening offices in Abu Dhabi and Hong Kong. 
Although both auction houses are currently experiencing significant crises compared to previous years, both Sotheby’s and Christie’s are demonstrating a commitment to commercial strategies in the process of internationalization, actively expanding their presence in global markets, particularly in the Asian regions. This confirms a major strategic shift to adapt to the changing economic landscape and increased global competition. In conclusion, both of the studied auction houses show tendencies of applying trade strategies in the internationalization process. 
When comparing the chosen internationalization strategies by auction houses, it can be noted that both Sotheby’s and Christie’s use similar methods:
1) Glocalization and direct investments help to strengthen the trust of local customers. 
2) Mergers are expanding their influence on the luxury segment. 
3) Franchising attracts ultra-wealthy buyers through luxury real estate. 
4) Digitalization allows auction houses to scale their business and attract new collectors.
Competition is also becoming a key factor in choosing the strategies presented. Sotheby’s and Christie’s compete for the same markets in China and Saudi Arabia. That is why both houses opened flagship offices in 2024 in Hong Kong. In Saudi Arabia, Christie’s was faster to obtain a commercial license, but Sotheby's is also expanding in the region. Both auction houses strive to gain the trust of new collectors and retain customers in times of crisis.
Sotheby’s and Christie’s use similar internationalization strategies because the art market is going through a recession – it is necessary to look for new growth points. China and Saudi Arabia became the most promising markets and both auction houses use the opportunity to grow there. 
High competition requires aggressive expansion, so their choice in favor of localization, direct investments and digital technologies is driven by desire to:
1) Strengthen positions in stable and growing economies.
2) Attract a new generation of collectors.
3) Minimize the risks of an economic crisis in Western countries.
Thus, the international expansion strategies of Christie’s and Sotheby’s are a meaningful response to global changes in the art market and current state of economy.




References:
Abode2. (2024). Christie’s international real estate ski partnership expansion. https://www.abode2.com/christies-international-real-estate-ski-partnership-expansion/ 
Art Basel & UBS. (2022). Art market report 2022. https://www.artbasel.com/stories/the-art-basel-and-ubs-global-art-market-report-2022 
Artlyst. (2024). Sotheby’s faces 88% earnings decline amid market slowdown. https://artlyst.com/art_market_news/sothebys-faces-88-earnings-decline-amid-art-market-slowdown/ 
Kinsella, E. (2024, April 17). Christie’s auction sales down 22 percent in first half of 2024. ArtNews. https://www.artnews.com/art-news/news/christies-reports-auction-sales-down-22-percent-h1-2024-1234712067/
Kholeif, O. (2024, May 22). Christie’s establishes its first Saudi Arabia outpost. ArtNews. https://www.artnews.com/art-news/news/christies-establishes-its-first-saudi-arabia-outpost-1234717828/
Dafoe, T. (2024, June 5). Sotheby’s closes deal with Abu Dhabi sovereign wealth fund for $1 B cash injection. ArtNews. https://www.artnews.com/art-news/news/sothebys-adq-abu-dhabis-sovereign-wealth-fund-deal-closes-1234722464/
Kinsella, E. (2024, May 15). Sotheby’s earnings fell by 88 percent during the first half of 2024, report says. ArtNews. https://www.artnews.com/art-news/news/sothebys-earnings-drop-first-half-2024-report-1234716568/
Kinsella, E. (2024, October 17). By the numbers: A breakdown of results from Sotheby’s London contemporary evening sale, October 2024. ArtNet News. https://news.artnet.com/market/by-the-numbers-a-breakdown-of-results-from-sothebys-london-contemporary-evening-sale-october-2024-2553569
ArtNet. (2024). Report: Fall 2024. https://media.artnet.com/image/upload/Artnet%20Intelligence%20Report%20Fall%202024/Artnet_IR_Mid-Year-Review_24.pdf 
 Artprice. (2023). The art market in 2023. https://www.artprice.com/artprice-reports/the-art-market-in-2023/our-global-ranking-of-auction-houses 
 Kakar, A. (2024, June 5). Art industry trends 2024. Artsy. https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-art-industry-trends-2024Artsy. (2024b). Sotheby’s opens its first retail store in Hong Kong. https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-sothebys-opens-first-retail-store-hong-kong 
 Athennian. (2021). Planning Global Expansion: Rep Office vs. Branch vs.      Subsidiary. https://www.athennian.com/post/planning-global-expansion-rep-office-vs-branch-vs-subsidiary 
 Bartlett, C.A., & Ghoshal, S. (2002). Managing across borders: The transnational solution. Harvard Business Press.
 Businesswire. (2022). Christie’s Global Sales Reach $8.4B in 2022. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20221219005642/en/Christies-Global-Sales-Reach-%248.4B-in-2022 
 Calvelli, A., & Cannavale, C. (2018). Internationalizing firms: International strategy, trends and challenges. Springer.
 Casadesus-Masanell, R., & Wise, C. J. (2010). Sotheby's and Christie's Inc. Harvard Business School Strategy Unit Case, 710-412.
 Christie’s. (2024a). Christie’s expands Middle East presence with incorporation and dedicated leadership in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. https://press.christies.com/christies-expands-middle-east-presence-with-incorporation-and-dedicated-leadership-in-the-kingdom-of-saudi-arabia-219275 
 Christie’s. (2024b). Christie’s opens new Asia Pacific headquarters at ‘The Henderson’ in Hong Kong. https://press.christies.com/christies-opens-new-asia-pacific-headquarters-at-the-henderson-in-hong-kong 
 Christie’s. (2024c). Diriyah contemporary art biennale 2024. https://www.christies.com/en/events/diriyah-contemporary-art-biennale 
 Christie’s LIVETM. (n.d.). https://www.christies.com/auctions/christies-live-on-mobile 
 Christie’s Real Estate. (2024). New markets, new opportunities for 2024 and beyond. https://www.christiesrealestate.com/blog/global-luxury-real-estate-growth-and-expansion/ 
 Holland, O. (2024, July 29). Sotheby’s expands Hong Kong footprint with cavernous new exhibition and retail space. CNN. https://edition.cnn.com/2024/07/29/style/hong-kong-sothebys-new-exhibition-and-retail-space-intl-hnk/index.html
 Codignola, F. (n.d.). The globalization of the art market: A cross-cultural perspective where local features meet global circuits. ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330481235_The_Globalization_of_the_Art_Market_A_Cross-Cultural_Perspective_Where_Local_Features_Meet_Global_Circuits
 Colbert, F. (2003). Entrepreneurship and leadership in marketing the arts. International Journal of Arts Management, 6(1), 30–39. 
Colbert, F., & Evrar, I. (2002). Art management – the science of the third millennium. Art Management, 3, 3–10.
 Demirbag, M., Tatoglu, E., & Glaister, K. W. (2008). Factors affecting perceptions of the choice between acquisition and greenfield entry: The case of Western FDI in an emerging market. Management International Review, 48(1), 5–38.
 Dolan, D. (1999). Cultural franchising, imperialism and globalization: What’s new? International Journal of Heritage Studies, 5(1), 58–64.
 Hubbard, N. (2013). Equity investment alliances and joint ventures. 
 Doherty, A. M. (2007). The internationalization of retailing: Factors influencing the choice of franchising as a market entry strategy. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 18(2), 184–205. https://doi.org/10.1108/09564230710737826 
 Dyer & Baade. (n.d.). Mergers & acquisitions in the art market. https://www.dyerbaade.com/blog/mergers-acquisitions-in-the-art-marke
 FasterCapital. (n.d.). Introduction to fine arts franchising. https://fastercapital.com/topics/introduction-to-fine-arts-franchising.html
 Garcia, G. (2012). Internationalization of culture through traditional arts: A case of Japanese SMEs.
 UBS. (2024). Global art market report 2024. https://www.ubs.com/global/en/our-firm/art/collecting/art-market-survey.html
 Harrillo Pla, A. (2021). Mergers and acquisitions: The São Paulo case. Calle 14: Revista de Investigación en el Campo del Arte, 16(30), 276–297. https://doi.org/10.14483/21450706.18301
 Hulst, T. (Ed.). (2023). A history of the Western art market: A sourcebook of writings on artists, dealers, and markets. University of California Press.
 Juwai. (2017, August). China’s expanding HNWI population is driving property demand. Juwai. https://list.juwai.com/news/2017/08/china-expanding-hnwi-population-driving-property-demand
 Khan-Magomedova, V. (2013). Globalization and decentralization of art market. DI MMOMA. https://di.mmoma.ru/news?mid=1202&id=342
 Kolycheva, V.A. (2013). Market of works of art: Theoretical and economic analysis. Prospect Publishing House.
 Lobo, C. A., Fernandes, C., Ferreira, J. J., & Peris-Ortiz, M. (2020). Factors affecting SMEs’ strategic decisions to approach international markets. European Journal of International Management, 14(4), 617–639.
 Lu, J. W. (2003). The evolving contributions in international strategic management research. Journal of International Management, 9(2), 193–213.
 López Morales, J. S. (2020). Internationalization: An analysis of 26 definitions. Intersticios Sociales, 19, 87–99.
 Maria, R. A. M., Maia, M. A. S., Sousa, P. S. A., & Meneses, R. F. C. (2013). Factors influencing the internationalization of services firms: The case of design, engineering and architecture consulting firms.
 Merrill. (2024). Art market update. https://www.pbig.ml.com/articles/art-market-spring-update.html
 Mitkus, T. (2016). Internationalization process of creative industries: Tendencies, problems and challenges.
 Moreira, M. R. A., Maia, M. A. S., Sousa, P. S. A., & Meneses, R. F. C. (2013). Factors influencing the internationalization of services firms: The case of design, engineering and architecture consulting firms.
 The National. (2024, May 6). UK Sotheby’s International Realty launches umbrella service for ultra-wealthy clients. The National. https://www.thenationalnews.com/business/2024/05/06/uk-sothebys-international-realty-launches-umbrella-service-for-ultra-wealthy-clients/
 Nielsen, L. (2011). Classifications of countries based on their level of development: How it is done and how it could be done.
 Novikova, G. N. (2005). Sociocultural concepts of management in art management. Bulletin of the Moscow State University of Culture and Arts, 2, 19–22.
 Observer. (2024). Sotheby’s Hong Kong head of modern Felix Kwok on the growth of the Asian art market. https://observer.com/2024/07/arts-interview-felix-kwok-sothebys-maison-asia-art-market/
 Phelps, C. (2022). License it. Graphic Artists Guild.
 Polovyan, A. V., & Gurova, E. G. (2018). Formation of definitions “art-business” and “art-management.” Vestnik of Donetsk National University. Series V. Economics and Law, 2, 149–161.
 Property of a Lady. (2025). Saudi Arabia, a new epicentre of the art world? https://propertyofalady.fr/en/exhibitions/saudi-arabia-a-new-epicentre-of-the-art-world/
 PR Newswire. (2024). Sotheby’s International Realty unveils new brand ad campaign. PR Newswire. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/sothebys-international-realty-unveils-new-brand-ad-campaign-302243880.html
 Robertson, I., Chong, D., & Art & Business. (2005). Understanding international art markets and management. Routledge.
 Roque, A., Alves, M., & Raposo, M. (2019). Internationalization strategies revisited: Main models and approaches. IBIMA Business Review, 2019, 1–10.
 South China Morning Post [SCMP]. (2024). How Christie’s and Sotheby’s are ramping up global expansion with major property moves. https://www.scmp.com/magazines/style/luxury/article/3231554/how-christies-and-sothebys-are-ramping-global-expansion-major-property-moves
 Segal-Horn, S. (2015). International strategy. In Wiley Encyclopedia of Management. Wiley.
 Simplicable. (2023). 26 examples of an art business. https://simplicable.com/en/art-business
 Smith, E. H. (2022). Intellectual property and licensing and the arts. In Business issues in the arts (pp. 127–143). Routledge.
 Sotheby’s. (n.d.). The history of Sotheby’s auction house. https://www.sothebys.com/en/about/our-history
 Sotheby’s. (2024a). Sotheby’s inaugural auction in Saudi Arabia to take place in Diriyah in February 2025. Sotheby’s. https://www.sothebys.com/en/articles/sothebys-inaugural-auction-in-saudi-arabia-to-take-place-in-diriyah-in-february-2025
 Sotheby’s. (2024b). Sotheby’s takes residence at a historic location in Paris. Sotheby’s. https://www.sothebys.com/en/articles/sothebys-paris-headquarters-83-rue-du-faubourg-saint-honore-opening
 Spacey, J. (2023). 26 examples of an art business. Simplicable. https://simplicable.com/en/art-business
 Suminova, T. N. (2011). Art-management as a socio-cultural concept. Vestnik MSUKI, 3(41), 117–123.
 Movius, L. (2024, September 26). ‘A statement in difficult times’: Christie’s opens new Hong Kong headquarters. The Art Newspaper. https://www.theartnewspaper.com/2024/09/26/christies-expands-to-new-hong-kong-headquarters 
 Movius, L. (2024, July 30). Sotheby’s launches multi-use space in Hong Kong’s business district. The Art Newspaper. https://www.theartnewspaper.com/2024/07/30/sothebys-launches-multi-use-space-in-hong-kongs-business-district 
 Shaw, A. (2024, November 7). Sotheby’s to hold first ever commercial auction in Saudi Arabia in February. The Art Newspaper. https://www.theartnewspaper.com/2024/11/07/sothebys-to-hold-first-ever-commercial-auction-in-saudi-arabia-in-february 
 The Business Research Company. (2025). Arts market report 2025. https://www.thebusinessresearchcompany.com/report/arts-global-market-report
 Jim, C. (2024, March 25). Christie’s to open new Hong Kong HQ, sees growing Asian Gen Z interest. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/lifestyle/christies-open-new-hong-kong-hq-sees-growing-asian-gen-z-interest-2024-03-25/
 Tien, N. H. (2019). Comparative analysis of multidomestic strategy of P&G and Unilever Corporation. International Journal of Foreign Trade and International Business, 1(1), 5–8.
 Tjosevik, R., & Refsland, B. (2012). Factors influencing international entry strategies: A born global approach.
 Wang, S. L., Luo, Y., Lu, X., Sun, J., & Maksimov, V. (2020). Cultural industries in international business research: Progress and prospect. Journal of International Business Studies, 51, 665–692.
 Yesu, K., Ganguly, S., & Das, N. N. (2022). Challenges to today’s leadership. In Coded Leadership (pp. 47–59). CRC Press.
 Zeqiri, J., & Angelova, B. (2011). Factors that influence entry mode choice in foreign markets. European Journal of Social Sciences, 22(4), 572–584.
 Zou, S., & Cavusgil, S. T. (1996). Global strategy: A review and an integrated conceptual framework. European Journal of Marketing, 30(1), 52–69.


