National Research University Higher School of Economics 

Faculty of Computer Science 
Programme: Data Science and Business 
Analytics 

BACHELOR'S THESIS 
Software Project 
Development of a System for a Short-term 
Forecasting of Time Series 

Prepared by the student of Group 213, Year 4 (year of study), 
Sinitsin Ivan Maksimovich 

Thesis Supervisor: 
School of Data Analysis and Artificial Intelligence, Senior Lecturer, 
Parinov Andrey Andreevich 

Moscow 
2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Abstract ......................................................................................................... 4 

List of Key Words ......................................................................................... 4 

Basic terms and definitions ........................................................................... 5 

1 Introduction ................................................................................................ 6 

1.1 Relevance ............................................................................................. 6 

1.2 Project Purpose .................................................................................... 7 

1.3 Project Goals ........................................................................................ 8 

1.3 Summary of the work .......................................................................... 9 

2 Review of alternatives on the market ....................................................... 10 

2.1 KNIME .............................................................................................. 10 

2.2 Microsoft Power BI ........................................................................... 11 

2.3 Google Colab ..................................................................................... 11 

2.4 Streamlit ............................................................................................. 12 

2.5 Gradio ................................................................................................ 13 

2.6 DataRobot AI Platform ...................................................................... 13 

2.7 PYTSBE............................................................................................. 13 

2.8 Conclusions and Results .................................................................... 15 

3. Requirements ........................................................................................... 16 

3.1 Functional Requirements ................................................................... 16 

3.2 Non-Functional Requirements ........................................................... 17 

3.3 Conclusions and Results .................................................................... 17 

4 System Architecture ................................................................................. 17 

4.1 Technological stack ............................................................................ 17 

2 

 
4.2 Other Components Considered .......................................................... 19 

4.2.1 Plain Django ............................................................................... 19 

4.2.2 SvelteKit ..................................................................................... 20 

4.2.3 Flask ........................................................................................... 20 

4.2.4 NoSQL Databases (MongoDB, Apache Cassandra, …) ............ 20 

4.2.5 InfluxDB .................................................................................... 21 

4.2.6 Apache Pinot .............................................................................. 22 

4.2.7 TimescaleDB .............................................................................. 22 

4.3 Constructional Patterns ...................................................................... 23 

4.3.1 Site Layout and Feature Overview ............................................ 23 

4.3.2 Security ...................................................................................... 27 

4.3.3 Data Processing Pipeline Editor ................................................. 29 

4.3.4 User Interface Design ................................................................. 30 

4.4 Data Processing Architecture Overview ............................................ 31 

4.5 Conclusions and Results .................................................................... 36 

5. Models ..................................................................................................... 36 

5.1 Models Utilized ................................................................................. 36 

5.2 Performance Comparison .................................................................. 37 

5.3 Conclusions and Results .................................................................... 37 

6. Conclusion ............................................................................................... 38 

6.1  Further Development ...................................................................... 39 

7. List of Sources ......................................................................................... 39 

3 

 
 
Abstract 

In the modern day, with steady increase in demand for the matter of 

analytical work to be conducted in various industries, the need for more 

accessible tooling becomes more evident. As more tools arise to meet this 

demand, the portion related to general time series workloads appears to remain 

lacking. 

The project presents itself as a software product, aiming towards 

performing tasks of short-term forecasting of time series data. The system 

developed is capable of working with various types of models, operating off of 

user supplied datasets supplied through the functionality of the system, allowing 

for its users to construct data processing and forecasting pipelines.  

The users are able to perform their work on multiple projects, all managed 

within the system itself, allowing for sharing of works with access control. The 

established user interface is designed for proper operation on mobile and 

desktop devices alike, ensuring its cross-platform availability, as well as its ease 

of use. The system requires no programming skills from the users for the 

purposes of analytical work, and is built with expandability in mind, ensuring 

that its feature set can be further extended to suit additional workloads, as it is 

built with Python programming language, enabling integration with its library 

ecosystem.  

The development of the system has been accomplished through the 

utilization of Django framework on the backend, with PostgreSQL as its 

primary database, as well as a mix of CSS, HTML, JavaScript and Svelte 

composing the frontend part of the project.  

List of Key Words 

Time Series Forecasting, Time Series Analysis, Analytical Platform, Web 

application, Full-Stack Project Development 

4 

 
Basic terms and definitions 

AI (Artificial Intelligence) – generally referred to the generative machine 

learning models, it is a collection of tools and services offering production of 

text and media information upon user’s demand. 

API (Application Programming Interface) – a connecting interface 

between different systems realized in a form of a set of functionalities in a 

particular application, allowing for it to communicate with other applications of 

interest over a particular protocol (in case of a Web Application, this typically 

encapsulates communication of the Frontend and the Backend, as well as the 

Backend with Databases). 

Backend – part of a Web Application (or otherwise) ensuring the execution 

of the code by the server. Generally, it is responsible for the communication 

with the Database, as well as additional functionality that is in need to be in a 

centralized place. 

Component – part of an application, the architecture of which adheres to 

the Component-Based Development style, in which it represents a reusable part 

of the code, coupled with similar parts of the code, utilized for the construction 

of the general application. Each component is responsible for either rendering 

specific parts of the application, taking care of self-contained logic, or 

otherwise. 

Frontend – part of a Web Application ensuring the execution of the code 

by the client (typically that being user’s web browser). It is responsible for 

handling logic on the user’s device. 

Library – an additional piece of software / programming code utilized for 

aiding in the development process of the final product. 

Technological Stack – a common set of tools utilized in the construction 

and further development of a particular software project. Generally, it 

5 

 
encapsulates large frameworks & libraries that describe the nature of the 

application’s behavioral nature and similar. 

SPA (Single Page Application) – a Web Application realized in a form of 

a single page (effectively remaining on a single URI at all times).  

UI (User Interface) – graphical representation of the application with 

which the user interacts. 

Web App (Web Application) – software that is accessible over the web 

via web browsers, usually deployed in a regular form or an SPA. 

1 Introduction 

1.1 Relevance 

In the modern day & age, the demand for accessible data science 

workflows arises, as the analytical field gains more and more traction with the 

advent of new AI technologies, as well as the growth of analytical work needed 

to be done in various professional fields. From this comes the need for more 

analytical platforms, as more and more people get into the field of data science, 

as well as the demand for simpler and easier workflows whenever that can be 

achieved, in order to simplify the work being conducted by the analysts. 

Throughout the recent years quite a few solutions have emerged attempting to 

address this issue, simplifying general aspects of managing data processing and 

analysis, yet most of these tools require either significant investment of time, 

effort and skill to properly operate. As well as that, the general focus of such 

systems being brought forth to the market generally varies quite a lot, each 

focusing on very specific aspects of the analytical work (visualization, data 

processing, machine learning, etc), and as such, certain fields like time series 

analysis get left out. 

6 

 
 
With this, there also comes the issues of accessibility and ease of use, as 

well as complications on the matter of feature expandability and system 

adaptability to one’s particular needs. As such, this project is called on forth to 

attempt to remedy such issues in certain part by filling in a niche of performing 

kinds of analytical and forecasting work, as well as conducting model 

assessment and more with relative ease on the part of user experience. 

1.2 Project Purpose 

The primary goal of the project is the development of an online platform 

which enables construction of data processing pipelines, allowing to perform 

various kinds of workflows as deemed necessary, utilizing the models and 

processing implemented, with primary focus set on supporting predictive 

workflows with time series, and with a specific focus upon allowing to 

accomplish such goals without the need for the users to write code on their side. 

The constructive work is conducted with the tools provided to the users in a 

form of a web application, all accomplished with a graphical user interface, 

available across different platforms. 

This web application is constructed in a form of a system, in which users 

are able to manage their currently worked on projects via general storage of 

metadata information, as well as share it with other users present within the 

aforementioned system through making their projects public to browse and 

observe. Additional features for profile management, search and similar are 

brought forth to aid users in this task. 

Lastly, this project is built with expandability of workload complexity in 

mind, bringing forth the underlying structure allowing for the general ease of 

feature set expansion via the utilization of conventional programming 

environments and underlying structure to achieve said results. 

7 

 
1.3 Project Goals 

-  Review existing solutions available on the market, which offer 

similar functionality to this project’s objective, compare and contrast 

their features, derive their strong and weak sides. 

-  Construct a general mechanism by which the application operates, 

utilizing modern tooling to achieve said goal. 

-  Develop application’s backend structure that is capable of supporting 

the workflows required. 

-  Establish proper way of handling and accessing data within the 

system. 

-  Develop a system for enabling the runtime of data processing 

functions on the backend, ensuring the availability of Python’s data 

processing ecosystem [2], as well as taking care of the 

functionality’s runtime stability and expendability. 

-  Design a modern looking UI for users to interact with throughout the 

application. 

-  Construct an SPA on the frontend side of the system, which presents 

the editing functionality, allowing for the construction of data 

processing pipelines, as well as forecasting of time series to the users 

via a web browser, while also adheres to the design language of the 

application. 

-  Build an API taking care of communication between the 

aforementioned SPA and the Backend for the purposes of proper 

interoperability of both parts of the system. 

-  Extend the feature set of the service through development of various 

data processing functions, including the models capable of 

performing the workloads on the matter of the forecasting of time 

series, for the purposes of demonstrating capabilities of the 

developed system. Such functions and models must remain 

8 

 
compliant with the underlying system architecture, in order to ensure 

their proper usability on the side of the users. 

1.3 Summary of the work 

By the end of the project’s development, a platform designed for the 

purposes of performing predictive time series workloads, as well as analysis and 

processing of time series data is achieved. It supplies the tools for editing data 

processing pipelines, dataset management, profile management and handling the 

projects within the system with storage of additional metadata helpful for saving 

specific details about the work, as well as controlling their visibility and access 

parameters. It also serves as a template for further expansion of the functionality 

based on one’s particular needs, making sure to present as little technical 

limitations on the matter of adding new functions as possible. 

The system is developed and designed in a form of a website, accessible 

from different kinds of devices, with its interface properly accommodating for 

both desktop and mobile users. Within the system they are able to conduct 

analytical work without the need to write any code on their part.  

The design of the system, its features and goals have been constructed 

based upon the conducted in chapter 2 “Review of Alternatives on The Market”, 

in which strengths and weaknesses of existing solutions are assessed for the 

purposes of this project to attempt to remedy the shortcomings of other existing 

works. After conducting this analysis, the Requirements for the project are 

established. Continuing on, the system architecture is described in  chapter 4 

“System Architecture”, bringing forth the detailed overview of existing tooling 

available for achieving set out goals, creating proper constructional patterns, and 

implementing all of the described work in a form of a Web Application. Lastly, 

the model work is being added into the system for the purposes of 

demonstrating the system’s capabilities on the matter of performing time series 

analysis workflows, including model assessment and their forecasting functions. 

9 

 
2 Review of alternatives on the market 

Under the development of this project, a number of existing software 

solutions, aiming to provide similar services, has been reviewed. As well as that, 

with the composition of the technological stack, various solutions on offer have 

been assessed as well. 

2.1 KNIME 

KNIME (Konstanz Information Miner) [5] is an open-source tool designed 

for the purposes of data analytics work, reporting and integration, which offers 

visual construction of data processing pipelines, model training and more. The 

toolset that it provides allows for the creation of various data processing 

pipelines, as well as extensive data visualization and simple model training, all 

accomplished via a graphical interface accessed by its users. 

Its downside, however, is that it is only available on desktop operating 

systems, excluding mobile platforms, which is problematic due to the rising 

prominence of the latter in the modern day. Furthermore, it is a fully local 

solution, which makes it bound by the end user’s device capabilities in terms of 

performance. Lastly, the fact that it is written in Java comes as an obstacle on 

the matter of the expandability of its feature set with the development of 

additional modules for the application, as most of the data science workloads are 

being handled through utilization of other programming languages like Python, 

widely utilized in the data science field. This comes as a problem, particularly 

for the matter of time series analysis and forecasting work, since it doesn’t 

feature any of such models for such purposes within itself, with only a few 

modules available on the marketplace supplied by the community, which this 

project’s goal is to remedy with much easier feature set expansion with support 

for existing Python solutions available. 

10 

 
2.2 Microsoft Power BI 

Microsoft Power BI (Microsoft Power Business Intelligence) [9] is a 

software kit designed for the purposes of processing, analysis and visualization 

of various kinds of data, with the primary focus set upon the management of 

Business Information, offering an extensively integrating solution into company 

systems for the purposes of constructing insights on business’s operational data 

and similar, as well as automation of various kinds of tasks within the 

aforementioned systems. Within its feature set, aside from the described tooling, 

it also offers various visualization workloads, helpful for certain kinds of 

analytical workloads, and more. 

Whenever things come to predictive analysis, however, this solution falls 

flat, as its primary focus lies within proper digestion and visualization of 

existing data, as well as composing reports for further analysis, whereas more 

extensive model-based workloads remain largely excluded from its general 

workloads. For the purposes of time series analysis in particular, it does a fine 

enough job with construction of graphs and charts, but not much else. 

Furthermore, it’s a proprietary product geared towards use with Microsoft’s own 

product ecosystem, which complicates the matter of adaptability to specific 

systems, as well as binding its use cases by the imposed restrictions from the 

corporation, largely requiring additional payments for more extensive use of the 

solution. The latter is especially problematic nowadays, in large due to the 

increased complexity of the product’s availability and acquisition process for 

entities based within the Russian Federation.  

2.3 Google Colab 

Google Colab (full name – Google Colaboratory) [6] is a powerful 

development environment utilized by many Python and R programmers to 

accomplish the purposes of data science studying and development for various 

purposes. The platform by itself presents as a cloud-based wrapper around the 

already popular Jupyter Notebook, which creates a programming pattern of a 

11 

 
shell-like workflow with additional features allowing for readable displays of 

data, graphs and other things the work upon which may concern.  

The major downside of this platform is that, unlike the others that are being 

reviewed, this particular platform’s focus is purely on experienced developers 

and data scientists well knowledgeable to do proper programming, which 

greatly increases the issue of accessibility and availability of the tool for people 

not familiar with the required programming languages, libraries or otherwise. It 

serves as more of a regular programming environment instead, complicating 

entry to the data science space. It is worth noting, however, that since the system 

that is being developed is implemented in Python, it is therefore capable of 

taking advantage of the same code that is being developed in the form of Jupyter 

Notebooks and is being hosted on platforms like Colab, therefore it can be 

integrated as separate functions and modules into the application with relative 

ease. 

2.4 Streamlit 

Streamlit [7] is a general Python-based web framework allowing for 

building of applications generally dedicated towards data processing, display 

and similar. It aims to be an approachable solution for the model displays and 

similar workflows centered around various things related to data science and is 

popular for demos and similar tasks. 

The notable downside of Streamlit is the fact that it is almost fully a self-

contained tool, which does not integrate with other workflows and is only really 

useful for data visualization and model demonstration. Furthermore, while it 

strives towards maximal simplification and embracing of simple scripting 

language for writing the application logic, similar to Colab it remains to be a 

highly code-dependent platform, which remains an issue with certain 

workflows. 

12 

 
2.5 Gradio 

Gradio [8] is a minimalistic web framework similar to that of the already 

covered Streamlit, providing easy tooling for the construction of web UIs for 

interacting with machine learning models. Initially considered for the purposes 

of graphing workloads within the application, it was determined that, while it’s 

not as self-contained as Streamlit, it still lacks in terms of its interoperability 

with external systems, requiring additional runtime to be executed in parallel to 

the main application, limiting its interactivity and hindering performance of both 

systems. Furthermore, its focus on machine learning and AI workloads makes it 

even less applicable in this particular project. 

2.6 DataRobot AI Platform 

The DataRobot AI Platform [10] is a cloud-based AI development and 

integration platform, which allows for construction, testing and deployment of 

different kinds of models in a business setting, allowing for their integration into 

the business process. As part of their functionality, they offer a multitude of 

analytical tools and models, including time series workloads (although the 

primary goals of such a platform remains to be machine learning workloads, 

therefore the models present are based on this concept). 

Unfortunately, such a service is fully proprietary and not free to use, only 

having a fairly short trial on offer for the matter of 14 days. Going further, it is 

a, once again, a fully self-contained system, employing its own system of model 

construction, which restricts additional feature set expansion with tooling 

provided in various kinds of Python frameworks and libraries available. 

2.7 PYTSBE 

As one of the use cases of a forecasting time series system can support, one 

particular task that might be of interest towards its users is the general model 

comparison and assessment of performance. One of such systems geared 

towards performing this particular task is the Python time series benchmark 

13 

 
project [21], developed and brought fourth for the general matter of assessing 

various models from different Python libraries. 

As worthy of note, however, is that such a system is only geared towards 

the matter of performing various benchmarks, instead of focusing on actual 

predictive workloads, and is as such falling short of meeting the requirements 

for performing forecasts and similar workloads. Furthermore, it’s not 

particularly user friendly, requiring direct interaction with code. 

14 

 
 
 
 
2.8 Conclusions and Results 

The following table showcases a brief summary of comparison results. 

KNIME 

MS 

Google 

Streamlit  Gradio  DataRobot 

PYTS

This 

Power BI 

Colab 

AI Platform 

BE 

Project 

Desktop 

Version 

Mobile 

Version 

Does not 

require 

coding 

skills 

Support for 

Python 

libraries 

Cloud-based 

Open 

Source / 

Freely 

Available 

Supports 

Time Series 

Assessment 

Workloads 

Supports 

Forecasting 

of Time 

Series 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

± 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

± 

± 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

± 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

Table 2.1. Overview of features and aspects of the mentioned alternatives 

Generally speaking, there is no proper solution for a freely available 

system on the market, which relieves the users from the need to write code for 

the purposes of performing time series analysis across different platforms, and 

this is precisely the aim of this project to remedy. 

15 

 
 
3. Requirements 

3.1 Functional Requirements 

-  Authentication: the platform is equipped with standard algorithms 

for accomplishing user authentication via the means of login and 

password provision. Anyone is able to get registered within the 

system, gaining access to publicly posted content and the ability to 

create their own. 

-  Project creation and management: the platform permits its user for 

the creation and customization of Project objects within the system, 

which act as an encapsulating datatype for holding most of the 

relevant information regarding the data processing pipelines. 

-  Permissions and administration: the application manages and 

controls which users are authorized to view certain projects, datasets 

and similar. This is to ensure that the privately set works within the 

system remain only accessible to its authors. Furthermore, only 

authors are able to actually edit the data processing pipelines, so the 

system extends the defined access controls over to the API as well. 

-  Management of uploaded data: Uploading, storing and accessing 

datasets from within the system (through the pipeline editor in 

particular), as well as storing additional metadata for ease of 

navigation and management from within the system. 

- 

Interactive data processing pipeline editor: mentioned above, this is 

part of the application which takes care of the construction of data 

processing pipelines, accomplishing said goal via visualizing 

available functions to the user, defining their parameters via forms, 

and executing them, all accomplished through an accessible 

graphical user interface rendered within one’s device through a web 

browser. 

16 

 
3.2 Non-Functional Requirements 

-  Hardware: during the development of the project its environment 

was a fairly low-end HDD-based system with a fairly low-end CPU, 

yet the general functions of the site worked quite well, without any 

major performance hurdles or otherwise, largely granted by the great 

optimization work done on the side of utilized web servers and 

PostgreSQL.  

-  Cross-Platform availability: as per the goals of the project being a 

web application, it must ensure its availability across different 

devices and platforms. In part, this is set upon the general UI 

requirements, as for the project itself to be accessible among 

different devices, the UI must accommodate for them wherever 

possible. 

-  Feature set expansion: as per the design of the project’s architecture, 

it should accommodate for the matter of addition of new functions 

for the purposes of being easily adaptable towards the 

implementation of new scenarios. 

3.3 Conclusions and Results 

The requirements described above present themselves as the general plan 

of the project’s feature set during development. Combining different goals of the 

project’s construction, covering different aspects of its usage and similar, a 

system capable of supporting different kinds of analytical and predictive 

workloads is being constructed, supporting data management, pipeline 

management, and more. 

4 System Architecture 

4.1 Technological stack 

Considering the nature of this project being a Web Application, CSS, 

HTML & JavaScript are the tools that have been utilized for the purpose of its 

17 

 
development. As of today, these tools are already enough to construct extensive 

and adaptive designs adhering to currently supported browser rendering engines.  

Certain aspects of these tools, however, remain inefficient, and so it was 

decided to employ the help of Svelte framework [5], which allows for splitting 

the Frontend application into Components. Each Component is responsible for 

handling certain kinds of logic within the Frontend application itself, as well as 

rendering certain parts of the user interface. Such act splits the application into 

more manageable code chunks, ensuring its maintainability and efficiency, as 

the complexity of the application grows.  

For the task of enabling server-side functionality, upon which lay the tasks 

of data storage, user and data management, data processing, model training and 

utilization, Django framework has been selected [1], as it allows for rapid 

development of features required, while also ensuring that the safe practices are 

being followed, with the provision of safe and secure authentication patterns, 

CSRF token validation, XSS attack prevention and more. Furthermore, since it 

is based on Python programming language, it allows for extensive use of 

existing software solutions present in its repositories, primarily focused on data 

processing, modeling and its visualization. 

For the matter of constructing the communication layer between the 

Frontend and the Backend in places where Django cannot handle required 

communication by itself, an additional tool under the name of Django REST 

framework [2] was employed, as it aids with the construction of REST-

compliant APIs essential for proper interoperability required by the project at 

hand. It enables the functional parts of the Svelte-based editor application within 

the system, tightly integrating with the original Django framework, reducing 

complexity of development and increasing the maintainability of the project in 

the process. 

For the purposes of storing and managing saved data, PostgreSQL [4] was 

chosen as the database engine for this project. The choice of this particular 

18 

 
solution was justified by its ease of integration into Django, with the latter 

supporting the object relational mappings to the submitted data, as well as high 

performance, storage efficiency and stability of its interface. Focusing on the 

general-purpose data storage, it is capable of serving all kinds of data required, 

including time series, images, additional metadata and more, all required for 

usage in this project. 

 Additionally, since it is a relational database, it allows for extensive 

construction of relations between submitted data into itself, which permits 

construction of extensive data structures suitable for complex workloads. In this 

project in particular, as it takes form of not just a simple application for data 

processing on the web, but as a platform, such functionality is essential to keep 

it operational and efficient. 

4.2 Other Components Considered 

This chapter is called for assessment of existing solutions, which were 

considered for the purposes of constructing the system at hand, yet were decided 

against for various reasons. The database engines considered in the following 

text were picked as displayed on DB-Engines Ranking [12], and as such have 

been additionally analyzed for the matter of achieving the set-out goals for the 

project. 

4.2.1 Plain Django 

Covering both parts of the backend and the frontend, Django could be 

utilized solely by itself to accomplish the final objective (coupled with 

PostgreSQL for data storage and regular CSS, HTML & JS for the frontend), it 

was ultimately decided to extend it with additional frameworks like Django 

REST and Svelte, for the matter that the editor portion of the project is far too 

complex to be implemented in simple JavaScript. Therefore, the decision was 

made to opt for a more complex software stack, yet the one that would take care 

of this issue. 

19 

 
4.2.2 SvelteKit 

SvelteKit [13] – considering the usage of Svelte in the application, 

SvelteKit is generally considered as the primary backend choice for the stack, 

due to the benefits of their co-integration, simplifying API construction and 

reducing the general complexity of the code. However, considering that the 

primary concern of this project is the enabling of data science workflows, most 

of it is accomplished on the Python programming language with its own set of 

tools, which would not work with this stack since the backend portion of it 

works on JavaScript, and additional integration of the required feature set would 

involve creating another Python runtime on the backend, which can be 

circumvented by simply using Django. 

4.2.3 Flask 

Flask [14] is a Python based lightweight web framework that was 

additionally considered for the development of this project, however taking into 

account that it was built to be as simple and lightweight as possible it doesn’t 

supply enough of the necessary features to make the project not only work and 

adhere to the safety standards of the modern day, but to also scale if the need is 

be. 

While generally possible to accomplish this entire project via the means of 

Flask, Django provides a much more cohesive and robust toolset for the job, 

whilst taking care of quite a lot of aspects of work in the meantime, so it is 

therefore was not utilized in the development of the application in question. 

4.2.4 NoSQL Databases (MongoDB, Apache Cassandra, …) 

The use of non-relational databases like MongoDB, Apache Cassandra [15, 

16], and similar was also considered with the development of this project, 

however it was decided against their use due to the nature of data handling in 

the project like this one, for that the underlying architecture of the database 

requires frequent referencing between different objects. Non-relational 

20 

 
databases do not supply the means to tie the datatypes together with relations, 

often instead offering simple dictionary-based approach for data management, 

which offers additional performance if the matter of the system’s usage presents 

itself as repeated access of large volumes of low complexity data. Lastly, it 

poorly integrates into the current tech stack, and so it was opted to instead use 

PostgreSQL, with which comes better support within the selected Django 

framework, as well as enabling mapping of relational data. 

4.2.5 InfluxDB 

InfluxDB [17] is a popular database engine utilized for the purposes of 

storing and managing time series data in particular, as it is specifically 

optimized for the task, splitting the loaded datasets into separate points in time, 

accessible individually. With its benefits, it is often utilized for the purposes of 

process monitoring, metrics of application runtime and results, as well as 

performing real-time analytics.   

For the matter of this project’s development, it was decided against its 

usage, because while it is indeed optimized for the task of processing time series 

data, it lacks the supporting architecture for storing regular tables of data 

required for operating a fully-fledged website. Furthermore, its support in the 

current Backend of choice is lacking, in large part due to the issue described 

above. In order to take advantage of it, a manual integration with its own Python 

interface is required instead, which overcomplicates application architecture for 

little return in the scope of this project, since the system is meant to be public-

facing into the internet or internal networks, therefore accessing external 

instances of InfluxDB is impractical and insecure, requiring such instances to be 

open to the public internet, posing a security threat to the data stored within. 

It is possible for a regular relational database and InfluxDB to be present at 

the same time, however this comes at an increased cost in terms of performance 

of the system and databases, as well as major increase in the underlying 

complexity. This use case would only be optimal whenever the large quantities 

21 

 
of time series are already present within any particular InfluxDB instance, 

situated in a closed-off network, in junction with other services for which it 

performs the logging. Therefore, the usage of this database engine was opted 

against.  

4.2.6 Apache Pinot 

Apache Pinot [18] is another database engine optimized for storage and 

accessing large quantities of data with minimal latency. Unlike InfluxDB, 

however, it adheres to the Online Analytical processing (OLAP) approach, 

which minimizes time spent on querying for data, as such an architecture allows 

for much faster data lookups, as well as increased interoperability with other 

Apache products and systems. 

Unfortunately, it succumbs to the same problems, as described with 

InfluxDB, being that it is unable to support the data structures required in this 

particular project. Additionally, its use and proper support in Django is similarly 

lacking, and, as it was described in InfluxDB, running several database engines 

for this particular project is inefficient, therefore it was decided to opt against its 

usage. 

4.2.7 TimescaleDB 

TimescaleDB [19] is a database engine, built upon and extending the 

feature set of PostgreSQL, the current database engine of choice within the 

project. This database engine provides additional data types catered towards 

time series analysis workloads, while also promising to deliver increased 

performance compared to that of PostgreSQL. 

Considering this, it’s important to highlight, on the other hand, that the 

database engine is fairly new, the fact of which doesn’t inspire confidence in its 

stability, and is likely to bring up potential issues going down the road. As well 

as that, its support in Django isn’t as great in comparison to PostgreSQL, and 

coupled that its upside of handling deserialized time series data doesn’t propose 

22 

 
much of a benefit since in the system itself datasets are being handled in their 

serialized forms, it was ultimately decided to opt for the more tried and truer 

PostgreSQL engine. 

4.3 Constructional Patterns 

Since the project is intended to be a web service, available to the public or 

deployed within a local network, it adheres to the standard client-server model, 

in part described in sections above through implementation of the Backend, 

taking care of server-side logic, which includes processing functions definitions 

and the runtime, and the Frontend, taking care of the user interface served to the 

user, with their browser acting as a client, handling certain logic by itself and 

communicating with the server. 

4.3.1 Site Layout and Feature Overview 

The resulting website is split into different directories, each one of them 

serving different purpose within the system, as showcased in Fig. 4.1. 

Fig. 4.1. The map of the site's features 

Upon first access to the site the user is greeted with a login/register screen, 

through which they must either authenticate themselves via filling out a 

23 

 
 
 
presented form, or switch to the registration form, as showcased on Fig. 4.2, in 

which they can create a new account. This ensures that the users of the site have 

an account while using the service, which allows for tracking of their behavior 

around the site, enabling the features of access control to specific projects and 

similar. Users’ passwords are stored in an encrypted form in the site’s database 

in accordance to the modern safety standards on the web. 

Fig. 4.2. Registration page 

Proceeding further, after authenticating the user is greeted with a home 

page, presenting itself as a dashboard, split into three panels, as depicted on Fig. 

4.3. 

Fig. 4.3. Example of a user's home page 

24 

 
 
 
The dashboard is split into 3 different panels, which persists while the user 

is browsing the site for quick access and convenience. The left panel holds 

recently accessed projects, so that one could always resume their work. The 

right panel serves the function of a navigation bar, allowing the users to access 

different parts of the website. 

The main panel is dynamic, serving different functions on each page. On 

the home page, it displays projects that the user might have pinned for quick 

access, as well as recently uploaded datasets for reference. 

Proceeding along the links along the right panel, the user can access their 

profile page, on which they’re able to see all projects with their authorship, as 

well as edit their appearance within the system, setting their profile picture, 

display name, as well as changing credentials like email, login and password if 

necessary. The profile page also contains a search bar, aiding in finding needed 

projects to work on. 

Fig. 4.4 Project Page inside the system. 

25 

 
 
The projects tab allows the user to browse projects freely available within 

the system for the purposes of easy access. Like with the profile page, it features 

a search bar, allowing users to find their projects of interest with relative ease. 

Clicking on any of the project items present within the aforementioned 

menus will bring the user to the project page, as shown in Fig. 4.4, on which 

they are able to see its description, as well as access the pipeline editor for 

executing the data processing pipelines set up by the project authors. On this 

page, they are also able to pin the project to the dashboard if such a desire is 

present. If the currently logged in user is the author of the selected project, they 

are able to edit its metadata, changing its name, description and thumbnail. 

Furthermore, they are permitted to access the editor mode of the data processing 

pipelines related to the project object. 

Going further, in the datastore section, the user is able to upload and 

manage their own datasets, with the aid of a search bar and a general list of all 

the datasets uploaded by the logged in user. Each one, once again, holds some 

metadata to aid with their management, namely a dedicated name and its 

description. These objects can be accessed from within the pipeline editor mode 

mentioned previously. 

To start working in the system, the user should: 

1.  Either log into their account or make a new one within the system. 

2.  Create a new project. 

3.  Upload the dataset through the datastore section of the website. 

4.  Open the project’s pipeline editor. 

5.  From within the pipeline editor, select desired functions, define their 

parameters to add them to the pipeline. 

6.  Run the pipeline, assuming that it is properly set up, and get the results. 

The results are stored within the project and available for later review, 

until the pipeline is executed again. 

26 

 
Lastly, the user is able to log out if the need is be, bringing them back into 

the login menu. 

4.3.2 Security 

Throughout the construction of the website, security has been considered in 

order to ensure safe and proper storage and handling of user generated data 

within the system. 

On the matter of user authentication, or, to be more specific, the matter of 

password storage, they are, as mentioned before, stored in a database in an 

encrypted and hashed form. Every password submitted is processed with the 

Password-Based Key Derivation Function 2 algorithm and further hashed with 

the help of a SHA256 algorithm, ensuring their secure storage sufficient for the 

site’s operation and user safety, as this algorithm chain is recommended by 

National Institute of Standards and Technology [20].  

In addition, this procedure also establishes a CSRF token on the client side, 

required on every submission of user data and changing internal states, as is 

necessary to prevent Cross-Site Request Forgery attacks. A CSRF attack is a 

type of an attack whenever a malicious actor steals authorization cookies from a 

user and then subsequently proceeds to perform requests to the target website 

without the user themselves authorizing such actions, or even being aware of it. 

A CSRF token validates the origin of a request, and as such stops these attacks 

from occurring. This project utilizes this protection mechanism in all of its parts, 

which are capable of altering database states and similar. 

In regards to user management within the system, there are 2 general roles 

set up for the purposes of controlling access to certain parts of the website: 

regular user and administrator. Regular users are only allowed access to the 

public facing portion of the website, on which the access to items within the 

system is limited by the set-up visibility settings, as well as project authorship 

27 

 
(those who create the projects in question retain access to the ability to edit their 

metadata and pipelines. Same goes for the uploaded datasets). 

Fig. 4.5. Administration panel of the system. 

This front-facing portion of the website remains generally the same for 

administrator users with one key difference, that being that they are permitted to 

access the administration panel of the site, showcased in Fig. 4.5, on which they 

are able to browse and edit objects stored in the database directly, such as user 

profiles, their project items, databases, and more. This role exists for the 

purposes of system administration. In addition, it can also be utilized to provide 

support for the site, helping with remedying potential issues that might arise 

during the work conducted by the users on the site. 

By default, created projects are only available to browse and see to their 

authors. The visibility settings can be adjusted to share them with other users 

either via link access or setting it to public, in which case these projects will 

begin to appear in system’s search. Projects marked as private are not accessible 

to anyone aside from system administrators and authors of said projects. 

Whenever a project is set to be publicly shared within the system, other 

users are able to browse the pipeline established by the work of the author, view 

28 

 
 
all of the set-up functions present, their parameters and more. They are also able 

to see the last result of the pipeline execution within the same page, however 

they are unable to edit any of the functions set up, as is implemented to prevent 

any potential harm done to the work of other users. 

Similar control system is implemented with regards to the datasets 

uploaded into the system. Unlike project items, however, uploaded dataset 

objects are visible and accessible only to those users who have uploaded them in 

the first place, for the purposes of safety and security of the data being handled. 

That said, if the users wish to share datasets between each other, they can set 

them up for proper display within the pipeline editor. 

4.3.3 Data Processing Pipeline Editor 

The editor part of the application, mentioned in 4.3.1 allows the project 

authors to set up data processing pipelines via a graphical interface. While on 

the editor page, as showcased on Fig. 4.6, the side panels change their functions: 

the left panel begins to display functions available within the system that can be 

executed; the right panel shows the order of the constructed data processing 

pipeline, and the main panel now displays the parameters of each function that 

the user chooses to select. 

Fig. 4.6. Editor Page showcasing ARIMA Fit function form. 

29 

 
 
 
Every function supplies their own parameters to be filled out by the user, as 

well as the brief description of its functionality, and more technical information 

on the matter of what variables it accepts, what values does it produce, loading 

of datasets and rendering information onto the user’s screen. It also features an 

ability to move the pipeline functions around if the need for that is present. 

As the user finishes up their work on this matter, and the pipeline is 

validated so that there is both data present in its runtime, as well as there are 

output functions present, the user can now press a button on the right panel in 

order to invoke pipeline’s execution. From this point on, the function UI locks 

up, and, upon the completion of the runtime on the server side, the user is 

presented with the result, defined by the pipeline functions and parameters. 

From there, they can study this result, get appropriate data for themselves, and 

similar. 

In addition, if the author of a particular project has set its visibility setting 

to either public or unlisted and is sharing it with other users, said users are able 

to browse the pipeline set up in a special locked down mode of the editor. While 

in this mode, they are still able to see the pipeline itself, browse its set up 

parameters and view the results of the last runtime execution if they so wish. 

Once the process is complete, they can reset it and either get back to work 

on the pipeline, or leave the editor. All of their work is stored within the 

system’s database, accessible to the author at any time. 

4.3.4 User Interface Design 

The UI has been constructed with a unified theme reflected in the general 

layout, iconography and design language.  

The aforementioned 3 panel structure of the application is designed to 

make a uniform framework of laying out items in the application, which stays 

consistent throughout the site. It also enables the increased adaptability of the 

website for mobile devices, as with small screen sizes the side panels disappear, 

30 

 
yet can still be invoked via the use of newly appearing buttons on the top right 

corners of the main panel. This is to ensure that the service remains accessible to 

people from different devices and platforms, minimizing design obstructions 

which make it hard to use in certain conditions. 

Lastly, it aims to maintain a consistent theme for the purposes of general 

branding and recognition, needed to stay out in the market of existing solutions. 

4.4 Data Processing Architecture Overview 

This section of the chapter is called for the matter of elaborating upon the 

implementation of the data processing pipeline editor, mentioned in 4.3.1 and 

further elaborated upon in 4.3.2. 

Fig. 4.7. Representation of the data processing architecture within the 

application 

The data processor portion of the application is split into several 

components, similar to the rest of the website. Namely, the things directly 

responsible for its operation are the database, the function registry, the runtime, 

and, lastly, the Frontend SPA. 

The database, the function registry, and the runtime are both situated on the 

server side, with the latter two being implemented within the Backend 

framework of the application, that being Django. The database interactions are 

31 

 
 
being handled through Django on the server-side, thus all of the interactions 

with it are being handled through another layer of logic. The general interactions 

between the systems in place are depicted on Fig. 4.7. 

Covered before, the database acts as a storage for many things related to 

the pipeline processor, specifically taking care of storing user defined pipelines 

for their processing in the runtime, as well as acting as a log, storing results of 

pipeline execution, together with the intermediate states of the functions. All of 

this gets queried by the Frontend SPA to display the status of the work to the 

user. The ER diagram showcasing the structure of the website’s database is 

showcased in Fig. 4.8. 

32 

 
 
Fig 4.8. ER diagram of the website’s database 

33 

 
 
The runtime portion of the application is a special function situated within 

the logic of the Backend, which takes care of the actual execution of the 

pipelines defined by the user, in accordance to the supplied parameters. In order 

to accomplish said task, it iterates over the defined pipeline, getting the function 

parameters from the database, previously deposited there via said user’s actions 

in the Frontend SPA. After retrieving the pipeline order and function parameters, 

the runtime creates an object in the memory in which it holds all of the 

intermediate values created and consumed by the functions themselves, and thus 

begins the execution process. On each step, it logs a special object into the 

database which contains information on the function execution status (whether it 

has been executed or not, and its success status, errors, additional information 

whenever necessary). As the runtime continues to operate, the Frontend SPA is 

actively querying the backend for updates on the matter of runtime execution, 

which it receives based on the statuses logged in the database. If any errors arise 

during the runtime, caused by improper assembly of the pipeline by the user, the 

execution halts and the Frontend SPA retrieves the error to display on the client 

in order to help with its remedying. If a function produces a result to be 

displayed to the Frontend SPA, the runtime saves it separately within the 

database. Lastly, when the execution of the pipeline is finished, the Runtime 

notifies the Frontend SPA of its successful completion, so that the results can be 

freely retrieved for their display and studying. 

In order to actually execute the functions stated within the pipelines, 

however, the Runtime requires additional help from the registry object, situated 

within the Backend functions. It acts as a mapper to the actual functions that can 

be executed, as well as a way to access their metadata, holding information on 

the matter of accepted and produced variables, function types, descriptions, 

names, etc. Utilizing Python’s features on the matter of referencing functions as 

objects, it acts as an integral part of the data processing architecture of the 

system, as it allows for execution of defined functions in an arbitrary way, as 

required by the nature of the work. 

34 

 
On the part of the Frontend, there lies a special SPA, which takes care of 

the client logic within the defined data processing architecture. Its use lies 

within providing the user with the means of actually constructing the data 

processing pipelines to be handled by the previously described parts of the 

architecture, as well as performing additional logic that can be ran on the client 

side (for example validating that the variables that certain functions intend on 

processing are actually being created within a pipeline.  

In order to enable construction of the data processing pipelines, there needs 

to be a graphical representation of functions present on the web page that the 

users access. As such, the Frontend SPA is responsible for portraying all of the 

available functions within the system for the users to work with. In particular, 

since each function does its own unique things, the application supplies special 

forms for every one of said functions. The forms load into the application as 

components, with a standard model of their operation, whilst containing all the 

Frontend logic within themselves so to not interfere with the rest of the 

application. As the user completes their work with any particular function, it can 

be set to be accepted within the pipeline, in which case the aforementioned 

forms get sent back to the Backend to be handled based on their types and 

supplied data, later to be stored into the database for the runtime to work with. 

With this, the pipeline gets updated and validated, for the user to either continue 

working on, adding new or editing existing functions, or to execute, putting the 

rest of the system in action. 

Described and implemented as such, this structure allows for flexible 

execution of the data processing pipelines within the system’s framework, as 

well as ensuring the capabilities for its feature expansion, ensuring that the only 

boundary for successful implementation of additional functions remains to be 

the capabilities of the Python language and its libraries. While maintaining that, 

it also puts an effort into keeping things simple to use and understand for its 

35 

 
users, allowing for the flexibility of its usage, as well as the ease of it at the 

same time. 

4.5 Conclusions and Results 

By the end of the work, the system described in the chapter has been 

successfully obtained, utilizing the tooling mentioned in the technological stack, 

in order to bring forth the goals set out by the system requirements laid out in 

chapter 3, striving towards the goal of creating a system for easy construction 

and management of data processing pipelines with the primary goal set forth 

upon short-term forecasting of time series data.  

5. Models 

For the purpose of demonstrating the capabilities of this project, the models 

suggested by my project partner, Ilya Suchkov, are utilized, selected by him as a 

part of a professional assignment. The following chapters contain the brief 

descriptions of the models, as well as general considerations with their 

implementation. 

5.1 Models Utilized 

For the matter of showcasing the system’s capabilities, various regressive 

models have been supplied as part of the pipeline editing functionality. Such 

models have been selected due to their general popularity within the field of 

time series analysis and forecasting workflows, as well as their relatively low 

demand for computational resources. Such models include the general 

Autoregressive model, ARIMA model, the ARMA model, the ARCH process 

and its derivatives (GARCH, ARCH, EGARCH, etc). In addition to this, the 

model work performed by my project partner as part of his portion of the project 

has also been supplied. 

36 

 
As it was described before, the system at hand is built with further 

expansion in mind, therefore additional models for various purposes can be 

brought onboard for any particular task if the need for it remains. 

5.2 Performance Comparison 

One of the possible use cases considered for the system was not only the 

act of performing simple forecasting and predictive analysis of time series data 

stored and processed within the system, but also the comparison of existing 

models on the same datasets for proper assessment of various metrics, which 

can be useful for the purposes of selection of certain models for particular 

workflows. 

As described in the paper “TSPP: A Unified Benchmarking Tool for Time-

series Forecasting” [21], the task of properly benchmarking various models is a 

complicated endeavor for the matter of vast difference of types of how different 

models perform. As such, mentioned in the paper, a collective of metrics utilized 

is important for the matter of proper assessment of various model performances. 

The general conclusion about the assessment of models, then, is the showcase of 

various kinds of metrics, available for the testing of the models.  

For the purposes of demonstrating the assessment performances of 

different models, and considering the fact of metric deviations described in the 

paper above, it has been decided to include most of the metrics capable of being 

performed on the selected models. The list of such metrics includes: R^2, Log-

Likelihood, AIC, BIC, among others. Aligning them on different models situated 

within the system, performance assessments can be made. Furthermore, the 

results of their calculation are also stored within the system for later analysis if 

the need for such purpose is be. 

5.3 Conclusions and Results 

Overall, a set of models for showcasing the capabilities of the system for 

the matter of performing various types of analysis, as well as accomplishing the 

37 

 
predictive workloads of the time series forecasting are the goals that have been 

achieved. Together with this, additional facilities for performing comparisons 

between established models have also been obtained, allowing users to properly 

assess various results obtained during their interactions and work in the system. 

6. Conclusion 

During the development cycle of the project, a system, the feature set of 

which allows for performing of short-term forecasting of time series, utilizing 

various functions and models at hand, has been achieved. The system is adapted 

towards operating across various platforms and can freely be utilized by users 

without prior the knowledge of coding. 

The ability to expand the system’s features with additional models allows 

for its utilization in various kinds of scenarios. As one of the scenarios for the 

usage of the system, implemented regressive models can be utilized for the 

matter of assessing the changes in trends in the short term, while for the more 

complex scenarios where precision is paramount, models of the transformer 

nature and similar can be supplied and utilized within the system’s framework. 

The set-out goals on the matter of achieving the technical requirements for 

the system have been successfully achieved as well. The system features the 

required tooling for proper project creation, management, access control and 

more within itself, supporting the proper construction of data processing and 

time series forecasting pipelines. Lastly, to accommodate for the matter of the 

security concerns, the proper steps have been taken to ensure the safety of the 

data stored within the system itself. 

The source code of the project is available at the following link: 

https://github.com/Miv2nir/diploma2425.  

38 

 
 
6.1 Further Development 

For the matter of further development and improvement of the system at 

hand, the following directions can be undertaken: 

-  Creation of additional roles within the system to be used by the 

customer service (helpdesk team) instead of administrator roles. 

-  Development of additional APIs for the matter of exporting data into 

other visualization systems. 

-  Automating analysis workloads through the invocation of user-

defined data processing pipelines through additional API for the 

purposes of automating analytical workloads. 

7. List of Sources 

1.  Django Software Foundation. Django Framework [Online Resource]. 

URL: https://www.djangoproject.com/ (Date of Visit: 07.03.2025). 

2.  Encode OSS Ltd. Django REST Framework [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://www.django-rest-framework.org/ (Date of Visit: 15.04.2025) 

3.  Python Software Foundation. Python Programming Language [Online 

Resource]. URL: https://www.python.org/ (Date of Visit: 07.03.2025). 

4.  PostgreSQL Global Development Group. PostgreSQL [Online 

Resource]. URL: https://www.postgresql.org/ (Date of Visit: 

08.03.2025). 

5.  Rich Harris. Svelte [Online Resource]. URL: https://svelte.dev/ (Date of 

Visit: 16.04.2025). 

6.  KNIME. KNIME Analytics Platform [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://www.knime.com/ (Date of Visit: 25.01.2025) 

7.  Google. Google Colaboratory [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://research.google.com/colaboratory/faq.html (Date of Visit: 

13.04.2025) 

39 

 
8.  Snowflake Inc. Streamlit [Online Resource]. URL: https://streamlit.io/ 

(Date of Visit: 18.04.2025) 

9.  Hugging Face. Gradio [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://www.gradio.app/ (Date of Visit: 30.04.2025) 

10. Microsoft. Power BI Overview [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/fundamentals/power-bi-

overview (Date of Visit: 04.04.2025) 

11.  DataRobot Inc. DataRobot AI Platform [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://www.datarobot.com/product/ai-platform/ (Date of Visit: 

16.05.2025) 

12.  Red Gate Software Ltd. DB-Engines: Ranking of Time Series DBMS 

[Online Resource]. URL: https://db-

engines.com/en/ranking/time+series+dbms (Date of Visit: 28.04.2025) 

13.  Rich Harris. SvelteKit Documentation [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://svelte.dev/docs/kit/introduction (Date of Visit: 07.03.2025) 

14.  Armin Ronacher. Flask Documentation [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/ (Date of Visit: 07.03.2025) 

15.  MongoDB Inc. MongoDB [Online Resource]. URL: 

https://www.mongodb.com/ (Date of Visit: 08.03.2025) 

16.  Apache Software Foundation. Apache Cassandra [Online Resource]. 

URL: https://cassandra.apache.org/_/index.html (Date of Visit: 

08.03.2025) 

17.  InfluxData. InfluxDB Time Series Data Platform [Online Resource]. 

URL: https://www.influxdata.com/ (Date of Visit: 28.04.2025) 

18.  Apache Software Foundation. Apache Pinot™ [Online Resource]. 

URL: https://pinot.apache.org/ (Date of Visit: 15.05.2025) 

19.  Timescale Inc. Timescale: PostgreSQL++ for time series and events. 

[Online Resource]. URL: https://www.timescale.com/ (Date of Visit: 

28.04.2025) 

40 

 
20.  Turan M., Barker E., Burr W., Chen L. Recommendation for Password-

Based Key Derivation. Part 1: Storage Applications. // NIST. Special 

Publication 800-132. URL: https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/132/final 

(Date of Visit: 18.04.2025) 

21.  Bączek J., Zhylko D., Titericz G. TSPP: A Unified Benchmarking Tool 

for Time-series Forecasting // Cornell University, arXiv Platform. URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17100 (Date of Visit: 16.05.2025). 

22. Natural Systems Simulation Lab. Pytsbe: Python time series 

benchmark. [Online Resource]. URL: https://github.com/ITMO-NSS-

team/pytsbe (Date of Visit: 16.05.2025). 

41 

 
