The Government of Russian Federation 

State Budgetary Higher Education Unit 

National Research University 
«Higher School of Economics» 

Faculty of World Economy and World Politics 

International Bachelor's Programme in World Politics 

Thesis Paper 

On the discipline 

«Research seminar in international relations» 

On the topic: 

« The impact of the EU refugee crisis on the socio-economic and political 
development of Italy (2015-2020) » 

By the student  
of the fourth year, 
group 214 
Smertin Vsevolod 

Academic supervisor: 
Ostrovskaya Elena 

Moscow, 2025  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

The  paper  focuses  on  conducting  comprehensive  research  on  the 

influence  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis  on  political  and  socio-economic  spheres  of 

Italy. The purpose of this thesis was to test the hypothesis about the correlation 

between  the  rising  number  of  refugees  entering  Italy  as  a  frontier  state  of  the 

European  Union,  and  internal  political  and  socio-economic  shifts.  The  paper 

will  use  case-study  and  correlation  methods  in  order  to  establish  a  clear  link 

between 

the  events,  along  with 

implication  of  Classical  Realism, 

Constructivism,  Securitisation  Theory  and  Migration  Systems  Theory that will 

stand  as  a  theoretical  framework  of  the  research.  The  study  will  cover  an 

overwhelming  amount  of  primary  and secondary data to process, calculate and 

apply in order to deliver comprehensive research with credible inferences. Some 

of  the  datasets  serving  as  an  example  to  be  analysed:  comparison  of  seat 

allocation  between  the  coalitions  in  2013  and  2018  General  elections  to  the 

Parliament  (both  houses),  2019  EU  Parliament  elections,  political  protests 

timeline,  public  opinion  (concern  over  refugee  issue  surveys),  unemployment 

rate,  regional  GDP  dynamics  (high  vs.  low  migration  areas),  national  budget 

shifts,  crime  rate,  incarceration  share  of  foreigners  in  Italian  prisons,  Security 

Threat  and  Terrorism  indexes  etc.,  with  respective  application  of  the  refugee 

crisis  numbers  to  the  listed  dimensions.  The  conclusions  will  comprise  key 

findings  of  the  research  together  with  final  testing  of  the  hypothesis:  the 

de-facto  extensive  and  far-reaching  influence  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis  on 

political  development  of  Italy,  with  limited/invisible  shifts  in  economic sphere 

and moderate effect on the social dimensions.  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of contents 

Introduction 
Abstract.................................................................................................................................... 2 
     Relevance...........................................................................................................................3 
    Goal and Tasks...............................................................................................................6 
    Literature review....................................................................................................... 7 
    Research Gap.................................................................................................. 10 
    Expected Outcomes....................................................................................11 
    Structure............................................................................................... 12 
                                      Research question & hypothesis......................................................13 
                                   Methodology..................................................................................13 
                                  Theoretical Framework.............................................................15 
                                 Limitations........................................................................... 16 

Main Body 
1.The impact of the migration crisis on the regulation of migration in the EU 
1.1 Transformation of the EU's common migration policy in the context of the crisis............ 17 
     1.2 Italy's position in the context of the migration crisis.................................................... 24 

2. Migration flows as a factor of political and socio-economic development of Italy 
2.1 Political sphere 
2.1.1 Institutional and Electoral Structure of Italy...................................................................29 

2.1.2 Coalition Dynamics and Political Instability: Political Conditionalities and Structural      
Limitations (2006–2013)...................................................................................................33 
2.1.3 The Impact of the Refugee Crisis on Party Politics (2013–2018)......................36 
2.1.4 Electoral Outcomes and Parliamentary Shifts (2018 General Elections).... 40 
2.1.5 Securitization and institutionalization of Migration: The Salvini Decrees 
and triumph of the League in the EU Parliamentary elections....................... 50 

2.1.6 Regional Reorientation, Migration Geography and Continued 
Coalitional Split......................................................................................... 52 
                                   2.1.7 Theory application to the case of Italy........................................57 
                                  2.1.8 Politics: Conclusion............................................................... 59 

2.2 Economic sphere 
2.2.1 Refugee expenditures: shifts in budget allocation.........................................................61 
    2.2.2  Labor market and GDP............................................................................................ 63 
          2.2.3 Inflation and Housing Prices............................................................................... 66 
               2.2.4 Economy: Conclusion.................................................................................... 68 
2.3 Social sphere 
2.3.1 Crime rate and incarceration.........................................................................................70 
    2.3.2 Security Threats and Terrorism................................................................................. 72 
        2.3.3 Social sphere: Conclusion.....................................................................................75 
Conclusion 
Conclusion............................................................................................................................. 75 
     References........................................................................................................................80 

2 

 
 
Relevance 

The EU refugee crisis is a far-reaching phenomenon that has been driven 

by  numerous  factors,  forcing  millions  of  people  to  flee  their  homes  and  seek 

shelter  on  the  other  continent.  It  is  the Arab Spring and the Civil War in Syria 

that  predominantly  spreaded  the  inflow  of  the  refugees  to  the  neighboring 

countries and to the European Union as well. To be more precise, the escalation 

of  the  conflict  facilitated  this humanitarian shock, namely due to the following 

factors:  the  excessive  rise  of  ISIS  and its control over the territories, increased 

sectarian  violence,  chemical  weapon  attacks,  humanitarian  crisis  (food,  water, 

medical  care),  and  intensified  U.S.  assistance  for  rebel  groups  (Human  Rights 

Watch,  2015).  The  United  Nations  Human  Rights  Office  reports  over  300,000 

deaths  in  an  ongoing  conflict  in  Syria  as  of  June  2022.  The  official  statistics 

reveal 5,2 million asylum-seekers in countries adjacent to the state of Syria, and 

over  6.8  million  Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDP)  (The  United  Nations 

Refugee  Agency,  2024).  Besides,  instability  in Iraq intensified the situation, as 

the inner armed conflict dated from 2003 to 2017 coerced over 1 million Iraqi to 

leave  the  country and ask for protection, with over 5 million IDPs (The United 

Nations  Refugee  Agency,  2024).  Another substantial confrontation has been in 

active  phase  in  Afghanistan,  with  several  non-official armed groups struggling 

for  power,  considerably  aggravating  the  social  conditions  within  the  country, 

hence  triggering  5,2  million  Afghani  to urgently escape from the country, with 

the  IDP  score  of  3,3  million  (The  United  Nations  Refugee  Agency,  2024).  A 

large  number  of  refugees  settled  down in neighboring nations, even with some 

imposing  limitations  on  the  entry  of  Syrian  asylum  seekers  (e.g  as  Egypt  and 

Lebanon).  However,  many  individuals  pursued  leaving  the  Middle  East  and 

instead  sought  support  beyond  the  continent  due  to  safety  concerns  and  have 

applied  for  asylum  in  European  Union  countries.  It  is  the  EU’s  solidarity  and 

3 

 
 
goodwill  standards  that  enlisted  the  refugee  inflow  on  a  par  with  the 

geographical  proximity.  The  European  Union  recognizes 

the  right 

to 

non-refoulement  -  “no  one  may  be  removed,  expelled  or  extradited  to  a  State 

where  there  is  a  serious  risk  that  he  or  she  would  be  subject  to  the  death 

penalty,  torture  or  other  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment” 

(Article 19(2), the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights), similarly with the legal 

right  for  asylum  of  every  individual  (Article  18,  EU  Charter  of  Fundamental 

Rights).  The  European  Union  as  a  complex  organisation  with  supranational 

authorities and   regulations, varying and intersecting legislature, appeared to be 

ineffective and dissipated in managing the boom of refugees, framing the border 

countries to combat the inflow by themselves. This created and exacerbated the 

conflicts  over  the  ways  of  managing  the  crisis  and  treating  the  refugees  both 

between  the  members  of  the  European  Union,  and  national  authorities  versus 

EU supranational heads. The theme of refugee crisis is highly relevant as it has 

sprawn  large-scale  consequences  within  the  European  Union  that  continue  to 

have  an  effect  nowadays:  EU  member  states  are  polarized  on  the  topic  of 

refugee  policy  (e.g  radical  attitude of the Visegrad Group (V4) versus absolute 

tolerance  of  Germany),  they  continue  struggling  to  manage  social,  economic 

and political aftereffects brought by the refugee incoming. So does Italy, an EU 

member state that has taken the main blow. What is more, the refugee dilemma 

is  a  global  problem that should be profoundly researched in order to find ways 

of  resolution,  especially  in  the  European  Union  as  an  outstanding  case  of 

massive scale. The migrant crisis has been a central driver of Brexit, the split of 

the EU member states and political parties within them. It has entailed not only 

intra-state  struggle,  but  also  the  clashes  between  the  supranational  authorities 

and national governments demonstrated by the unilateral border closures, public 

dissent over refugee policies and refusals to accept refugees.  

The  study's  relevance  is  embedded  in  the  migration  phenomenon 

spreading  around  the  world  and  hence  becoming  a  global  problem.  The  crisis 

4 

 
delivered  significant  challenges  to  the  EU  as  a  whole  that  has  resulted  in 

numerous  changes  regarded  as  negative  influence:  the  growing  contradictions 

among  member  states,  as  well  as  the  political  and  economic  circumstances  of 

the  member  states,  have  strengthened  centrifugal  trends  in  unification.  Italy, 

being  the  EU's  southern  border  and  one  of  the  founding  fathers,  suffered 

tremendously  as  a  result  of  the  migration  crisis.  It  is  therefore  of  increased 

concern  to  examine  how  the  migration  crisis  has  affected  Italian  politics,  the 

country's economy and social sphere. 

Henceforth,  the  paper  intends  to  investigate  the  timeline  of  the  refugee 

crisis  by  exploring  the  supranational  agenda,  Italian  inner  situation  and 

interaction  between  them  to  fully  comprehend  the  causality  of  the  events  and 

reveal  the  real  aftermath  in  Italy,  based  on  statistical  indicators  and  official 

documents.  For  the  supranational  level  it  is  suggested  to  research  the  EU 

refugee policy dynamics, legislative acts and initiatives to understand the set of 

conditions  under  which  the  state  of  Italy  had  to  take  action.  In regard to Italy, 

the  paper  will  primarily  describe  the  chronic  of  events,  limited  from  2015  to 

2020  due  to  the beginning of the COVID-19 that has suspended the movement 

of people for decent period of time, and afterwards delve into statistical analysis 

of  various  indicators  from  political,  economic  and  social  spheres  to  assess  the 

influence  of  the  refugee  crisis  on  the  development  of  Italy.  The  available 

literature either focuses on the regional group of states (e.g Visegrad Group) or 

selects  one  state  and  examines  the  transformations  within  one specific field. It 

lacks  comprehensive,  full-scale  examination  of  Italian  development  dynamics 

within  the  context  of  the  migration  crisis  linked  to  shifts  in  political  and 

socio-economic spheres.    

5 

 
 
 
 
 
Goal and Tasks  

Accordingly,  the  fundamental  purpose  of  the  paper  is  to  establish  the 

links between the advent of the refugee crisis and shifts within the state of Italy. 

By  proper  selection  and  collection  of  necessary  data,  accurate  and  profound 

analysis,  the paper will be competent enough to derive substantiated inferences 

that will be of much usefulness for political science.  

Literature review 

In  order  to  determine  the  main  points  of the events, the paper intends to 

examine  a  number  of  publications  and  significant  scholarly results or opinions 

while researching the body of current literature. Key terms like "refugee crisis," 

"impact,"  "consequences,"  "management"  and  "challenges"  have  been  applied 

within  the  framework  of  the  migrant  crisis  in  Italy  to  select  and  analyze  the 

articles  in  focus  based  on  their  historical  relevance  and  relevance  to  the topic. 

Colombo (2017) claims that refugee discourse in Italy has been overwhelmingly 

constructed  by  far-right and extreme nationalist parties that framed migrants as 

a security threat to the wellbeing of the Italian state, conducting the "politics of 

fear" while discrediting humanitarian concerns. Far-right parties like Brothers of 

Italy and Northern League propagandised "massive invasion", "clandestine" and 

"politics  of  fear"  to  generate  explicitly  negative  views  of  refugees,  with 

center-left  political  parties  adjusting  to  this  agenda.  The  populist  rhetoric 

heavily emphasized threats rather than humanitarian considerations, dominating 

the  sentiments  within  Italy.  Ambrosetti&Paparusso  (2019)  argue  that  the 

reaction of the European Union appeared to be fragmented and sluggish, relying 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
on  the  initiatives  like  the  relocation  scheme,  hotspot  approach  and  bilateral 

agreements  with  Libya  and  Turkey  regarding  the  joint  management of refugee 

flows. Additionally, due to limited labor migration channels since 2009, people 

are  unable  to  officially  seek  asylum, which presents a dilemma for Italy. Since 

effective  repatriation  agreements  have  expired,  unauthorized  migrants  are now 

employed on the black market. Reopening legal migration channels would help 

Italy  meet  its  demographic  demands  and  labor  shortages.  By  balancing 

economic  acceptance,  this  strategy  seeks  to  lessen  unfavorable  opinions  about 

migration.  Campo  et  al.  (2024),  examining  the  data  from  2014  to  2017, 

discovers that an increase in every 1% of migrants is tied to the slightly stronger 

support  to  right-wing  parties  among  the  population,  at  the  same  time  the 

popularity  of  left-wing  centrist  parties  declines.  Italy  has  not  experienced  any 

visible  short-term  financial  impact  that  could  be traced by the study, hence the 

paper concludes that anti-migrant voting behavior is largely shaped and framed 

by  the  far-right  populist  agenda  on  security  issues  and  ideological  anxieties, 

especially  in  the  regions  of  refugee-hosting.  Gianfreda  (2017)  reviews 

parliamentary  debates  on  migration  in  the  UK  and  Italy, and finds that in both 

countries  centre-left  parties  view  the  crisis  as  a  humanitarian  catastrophe, 

underlining  the  necessity  to  assist  women,  children  and  families  as  a  part  of 

inclusive policies. Contrarily, centre-right political parties frame the crisis as an 

uncontrolled issue, advocating for imposition of restrictions and safeguarding of 

national  sovereignty.  The  paper  emphasizes  the Forza Italia as a locomotive of 

right-wing  proponents  that  used  the  refugee  crisis  issue  to  oppose  the 

government  and  criticize  the  European  Union.  What  is  more, Gattinara (2018) 

notes  that  the  manifestation  of  the  migrant  crisis  has  shifted  the  anti-refugee 

protest in both qualitative and quantitative terms: Italian politics experienced an 

increase in far-right activism, which reoriented from institutional form of action 

to  street  protests.  The  far-right  political  parties  effectively  used  public debates 

as  a  tool  to  oppose  the  current  government and conducted grassroots activities 

7 

 
in  order  to  engage  the  local  population  in  the  issue.  The  mainstream  for  the 

far-right  agenda  was  predominantly  the  threat  of  ‘invasion’  by  migrants,  with 

corruption  of  the government and population disillusionment on Italian politics 

being  in focus as well. Molnár (2019) emphasizes the approaches of Renzi and 

Gentiloni  governments  focused  on  genuine  European asylum policy and moral 

obligation  to  save  lives  of  refugees  while  managing  the  crisis.  Italy  supported 

the  Libyan  national  unity  government  by  sending  missions  and  troops,  with 

further  memorandum  of  understanding  being  bilaterally  signed  in  order  to 

reduce the inflow of the Libyans, resulting in a 68% decrease in arrivals by the 

sea.  Yet  the  paper  concludes  that  effective  management  of  the  refugee  crisis 

requires  a  common  European  solution  and  international  cooperation,  without 

which  Italian  efforts  would  have  been  in  vain.  Dimitrov&Angelov  (2017) 

concluded  that  in  the  short-term  despite  popular  unrest  of  the  public  in  Spain 

and  Italy,  where  there  is  a high youth unemployment rate, on the arrival of the 

refugees  and  the  impact  on  the  jobs,  it  appeared  to  be  positive.  However, 

long-term  implications  are  proposed  to  be  excessively  negative,  as  refugees 

disrupt  the  education  process that implies incompetence on the labor market in 

the  future,  which  is  already  weakened  by  high  unemployment  rate.  Migrants 

thus cannot contribute positively in the economy of the EU members, moreover 

they  are  likely  to  be  prone  to  terrorist  recruitment  or  criminal  groups. 

Triandafyllidou  (2018)  concluded  that  the  refugee  crisis  cannot  be  only 

attributed  to  the  numbers  of  incoming  refugees,  but  also  the  crisis of effective 

governance  and  public  perception  of  the  issue  which  depended  on  the  media 

coverage and respective framing of the crisis. Geddes & Scholten (2016) argued 

that  the  migration policies of Italy have been reactive, which enabled the crisis 

to  perform  as  a  magnifier  of  political  instability,  incentivise  the  usage  of 

populist  agenda  and  create  short-term  policy  improvisation.  Finotelli  &  Ponzo 

(2018)  found  that  the  already  shattered  Italian  welfare  system  has  become  a 

pre-conditionality  and  an  obstacle  for  successful  integration  of  refugees  into 

8 

 
socio-economic  spheres  of  the  state,  concluding  that  the  combination  of  strict 

measures and rising number of refugees augmented social tensions and impeded 

long-term  integration.  Ambrosini  (2017)  derives  that  Italian  inconvenient 

policies  triggered  a  formation  of  the  grey  zone, which offered opportunities of 

irregular  jobs  for  illegal  refugees  and thus fuelled socio-economic inequalities, 

insofar  refugees’  cheap  labor  dumped  the  labor  market.  Dines  &  Rigo  (2015) 

argued that the EU refugee crisis fueled the identity crisis in Italy as a long-term 

effect,  with  the  increased migration triggering unresolved social tensions about 

nationhood, initiating the rise of the right-wing populist parties. Lavenex (2018) 

concluded  that  Italy’s  discontent  with  the  actions  of  the  European  Union 

highlights  ‘organized  hypocrisy’,  emphasizing  the  situation  at  which  the  EU 

institutions  promise  solidarity  and  assistance  yet  leave  frontier  states  alone  to 

manage  the  crisis  on  their  own.  Triandafyllidou  (2016)  revealed  that  Italy’s 

management  of  the  refugee  crisis  was  constrained  by  the  dilemma  of  choice 

between the efficiency of its policies and dignity, meaning the protection of the 

refugee’s  rights.  During  the peak years, none of the two dilemma’s dimensions 

was met due to overload.  

Research Gap 

Albeit  many  articles  have  been  dedicated  to  the  examination  of  the  EU 

refugee  crisis  and  its  influence  at  large,  with  sufficient attention to the state of 

Italy  as  one  of  the  states  mostly  affected  by  the  crisis,  there  exist  several 

omissions  in  this  field  of  research  that  should  be  fulfilled.  To  begin  with, it is 

important  to  assess  the  structural  changes  of  Italy’s political life by examining 

both federal and supranational elections, to see if there was a change in balance 

of  power between right-wing and left-wing fractions. The paper will take exact 

numbers  and  calculate  the  actual  shifts  with  respective  conclusions.  Also, it is 

important  to  investigate  local  sentiments  by  reviewing  numerous  surveys  to 

9 

 
 
 
portray  the  opinion  of  the population, and its change within the years of crisis, 

as  a  part  of  social  research.  Another  important  point  is  limited  focus  on 

socio-economic impact, with several articles only barely mentioning the issue of 

black-market employment. The sufficient labor market analysis, public services 

and  regional  disparities  should  be  studied  to  complement  the  overall 

well-covered  political  scene.  Additionally,  many  articles  compare  the  stats 

within 2014-2017, which is inappropriate as the time frame is too short to assess 

the  effects,  the  paper  suggests  to  widen  it  to  2019,  and  even  sometimes  use 

years  before  2014  to  comprehend  the  actual  change  in  some  indicators  that 

require more time to demonstrate the change. In overall, the gap consists of the 

limited  study  of  some  spheres of Italy, lack of an in-depth analysis, absence of 

coverage  of  some  important  issues,  which  may  distort  general  conclusions. 

Lastly, as many papers analyze the overall EU economic burden, there are very 

few articles that study explicitly economic impact for Italy. While it is possible 

to cover some of the economic insights on Italy in generalized articles, the field 

lacks  more  in-depth,  targeted study to create and assess the full economic state 

of affairs.  

Expected Outcomes 

The  study  is  anticipated  to  uncover  major  changes  in  Italy's  political 

landscape,  showing  a  rise  in  backing  for  right-wing  groups  at  regional  and 

national  levels  after  the  refugee  crisis.  Public  opinion  analysis  is  expected  to 

reveal an increasing doubt about migration policies, with significant differences 

across  various regions of the nation. The research anticipates a growth in illicit 

job  opportunities  for  refugees,  emphasizing  the  socio-economic  difficulties 

worsened  by  the  crisis,  including  uneven  access  to  public  services  and 

integration  into  the  labor  market.  Longitudinal  data  analysis  is  expected  to 

reveal  persistent  negative  patterns  in  economic  indicators  for  impacted  areas, 

such  as  increased  unemployment  rates  and  diminished  public  resource 

10 

 
distribution.  Prolonging  the  time  frame  to  2019  is  anticipated  to  yield insights 

into  the  lasting  impacts  of  the  crisis,  such  as  slow  economic  recovery  and 

ongoing political division. Furthermore, the study expects to reveal deficiencies 

in  Italy's  institutional  reactions  to  the  crisis,  which  could  have  led  to  the 

worsening  of  these  adverse  trends.  In  general,  the  results  are  expected  to 

underscore  the  multifaceted  effects  of  the  refugee  crisis  on  Italy,  stressing  the 

interrelatedness of political, social, and economic repercussions.  

Structure 

The  structural  framework  of  the paper is the following: the introduction, 

which  acquaints  the  topic,  its  relevance,  goal  and  tasks  literature  review, 

research  gap,  expected  outcomes, 

research  question  and  hypothesis, 

methodological groundwork, limitations and structure. In the main body section, 

the  paper  will  consist  of  two  major  chapters.  First,  historical  overview  and 

statistical  context,  which  implies  contextual  narration  in  a  chronic  order  to set 

up  a  logical  chain  of  events.  It  will  represent  two  subchapters:  the  European 

Union  and 

Italy,  as 

the  context  of 

the  EU  supranational  policies, 

decision-making,  and  its  intersection  with  Italy’s  position  matters.  The  second 

chapter is data analysis that entails three subchapters. Politics, where the results 

of  elections,  respective  changes  in  seats  will  be  tracked  and  examined,  along 

with  the  political  protests,  government  interaction  with the EU, and legislature 

changes.  The  second  one  is  the  Economic  subchapter,  where  the  fundamental 

economic  patterns  will  be  analysed:  the  Unemployment,  GDP  change, 

government  expenditures,  approximate  expenses  on  subsidies  to  refugees  will 

be  presented  and  investigated.  The  third  one  is the Social sphere, in which the 

paper  will  cover  the  crime rate along with the share of foreigners in the Italian 

prisons,  as  well  as  security  threat  and  terrorism  indexes  with  respective 

application  to  the  rising  number  of  refugees.  Finally,  the  last  chapter  will 

11 

 
 
contain  summarized  inferences,  that  is,  de-facto  causal  relationships  between 

the refugee crisis and changes in Italian spheres that will either be confirmed or 

refuted by general evaluation of the hypothesis. In conclusion, the paper intends 

to briefly emphasize the results and assemble the overall view of the study. 

Research question & hypothesis 

Research Question: “How did the EU refugee crisis affect the socio-economic 

and political development of Italy?” 

Hypothesis  :  The  EU  refugee  crisis  has  affected  Italian  political  and 

socio-economic  spheres  in  a  negative  manner: triggering social anxiety, rise of 

the  right-wing  parties  and  numerous  protests  across  the  country  in  political 

sphere,  visible  economic  challenges  with  increased  public  and  security 

spendings, rise in unemployment, and social insecurity demonstrated by security 

threat and terrorism indexes, crime and incarceration rates.   

Methodology 

While  investigating  the  essence  of  the  refugee  crisis,  the  paper  will  use 

statistical  data  sorted by time frame 2010 to 2020, as it is oftentimes necessary 

to  study  indicators  years  before the crisis, for the aims of comparison, analysis 

and  inference-making.  Data  collection  will  represent  both  primary  and 

secondary  data,  where  the  former  stands  for  the  interviews  and  focus  groups, 

surveys  and  field  observations,  and  the  latter  -  official  policy  documents  and 

government  reports  and  declarations,  Non-Governmental  Organization  (NGO) 

reports,  statistical  data and media analysis. When it comes to exploring the EU 

discourse, the paper plans to appeal to the official site of the European Council 

(consilium.europa.eu)  that  will  provide  the  timeframe  of  the  EU  migration 

policy  with  all  summits,  suggestions,  amendments  and  fierce  debates.  It  will 

likewise  introduce  the  data  on  policy  reforms  and  legislative  proposals.  The 

12 

 
 
World Bank (worldbank.org) will assist in numerical data, such as the number 

of  incoming  refugees  for  each  year,  the  change  of  GDP,  federal  budget 

dynamics  and  other  aspects.  The  websites  of  the  United  Nations  High 

Commissioner 

for  Refugees 

(UNHCR) 

(unhcr.org) 

and  Eurostat 

(ec.europa.eu) will help in evaluating the legally registered refugees to estimate 

the  approximate  economic  damage,  roughly  ‘direct’  damage  to the budget and 

economy  being  calculated  by  multiplying the official number of people having 

shelter  to  the  standard  subsidies  of  Italian  state  as  one  of  the  economic 

indicators  for  assessing  the situation. The source of official legislative acts and 

actions of the Italian government is Gazzetta Ufficiale (gazzettaufficiale.it) that 

will help in analyzing Italian response to the crisis on official state level, and its 

relationship  to  the  policies  proclaimed  by  the  EU  supranational  authorities. 

Ministero  dell'interno 

(interno.gov.it),  publishing  official  statistics  of 

authorized  state  agencies  on  migration,  residence  permits  and  asylum 

applications, together with Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (istat.it) that provides 

labor  market  statistics,  social  integration  indicators  and  residing  foreign 

populations,  will  be  the  major  sources  of  statistical  data  to  be  covered  and 

analyzed  in  the  research.  In  the  section  of  data  analysis  methods,  the  paper 

proposes  to  similarly  use  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  methods,  with 

statistical  analysis  as  a  central pillar of the former, and discourse analysis - the 

latter.  In  the  media  coverage  and  discourse  analysis,  the  paper  will  focus  on 

dynamics in the social media called ‘X’ (x.com) with an emphasis on statements 

made by political leaders, including those of the opposition and opinion leaders 

as well.  

For  the  methods  in  use,  the  case-study  is  most  applicable  as  the  paper 

selects  Italy  as one EU member state that is sharing the burden of the common 

problem,  further  assessing  the  correlation  as  a  statistical  analysis  method  to 

prove the causality of the variables.  

13 

 
The  research  boundaries  consist  of geographic focus (i.e the selection of 

Italian  state  as  a  unit  for  analysis),  temporal  scope  (  highlighting  a  defined 

period  (2010  to  2020)  to  reflect  the  before,  beginning,  the  peak,  and  recent 

developments)  and  thematic  limit  (  i.e  the  studying  of  political,  economic and 

social impacts).  

Theoretical Framework 

The Realist school of thought will serve as the theoretical foundation for 

this  research.  Due  to  its  emphasis  on  security,  state  authority,  and  national 

interests  -  all  of  which  served  as  major  tenets  of  divergent  strategies  and 

conflicts  among  member  states  and  inner-state  political  parties  in dealing with 

the refugee crisis - classical realism would be more appropriate than structural 

one.  Classical  realism  at  its  core  emphasizes  rationality  of  governments,  their 

pursuit  of  the  self-interest  on  the  international  arena,  with  an  objective  of 

enhancing the power and security in a competitive environment that is linked to 

the  idea  of  survival.  The  security  of  a  region,  state,  people,  and  interests  is 

typically assumed when security concerns are the focus of attention.  

It is highly persisted to utilize Constructivism to study the perceptions of  

national  threat  and  circumstances  following  from  it.  The  fundamental  idea  of 

Constructivist school states that the definition of national threat derives from an 

actor's social construction, that is, perception and interpretation of reality. It will 

therefore  assist  in  exploring  the  motives  beyond  Italy's  behavior  based  on  its 

perceptions and constructions of essence.  

Another  theoretical  framework  to  be  implemented  is  Securitization 

theory,  which  would  be  of  much  importance  while  analysing how the refugee 

crisis  has  evolved  into  a  security  threat  via  political  dynamics.  The  theory 

assumes  that  state  officials  may  ‘securitize’  an  issue  by  framing  it  as threat to 

state  stability  and  even  existence.  They  often  advocate  for  emergency  policies 

14 

 
 
that  suspend  the  normal  environment  (e.g  unilateral  fence  constructions  in  the 

context of the EU), and influence public opinion.  

Lastly, the paper intends to apply the Migration Systems Theory (MST) 

that  stresses  both  push  (conflict,  prosecution,  instability)  and  pull  (promise  of 

better living conditions, safety and opportunities) factors. It will assist in a more 

profound  understanding  of 

inter-state  dynamics, 

the 

involvement  of 

international  organizations  and  identification  of  factors  affecting  migration 

patterns.  

Limitations 

Some  primary  sources  are  likely  to  be  limited  in  access  and  appear 

controversial  in reliability. Therefore, in order to avoid biased data sources, the 

paper  will  employ  bias-mitigation  techniques  such defining precise assessment 

criteria  and  promoting  a  range  of  viewpoints.  Besides,  variables  like 

illegal(undocumented)  border  crossings  may  undermine  the  objectivity  of  the 

conclusions.  i.e  data  variability.  The  research  might  also be constrained by the 

absence of the official data for the specific period of time and/or accordingly for 

the  specific  variable.  Nonetheless,  the  paper  will  endeavor  to  overcome  such 

limitations by covering the maximum number of sources and archives available, 

to  discover,  replace  or  compare  the  information, and extract most input for the 

analysis.  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Main Body  

The impact of the migration crisis on the regulation of migration in the EU 

1.1 Transformation of the EU's common migration policy in the context of the crisis 

The  European  Union,  remarkably  complex  supranational  structure 

consisting of 27 sovereign states being united and interlinked via miscellaneous 

economic  and  political  agreements  and  commitments,  is  a  representative 

example  of  successful  deep  supranational  integration.  Its  decision-making 

requires  more  time  than  a  usual  procedure  within  one  state,  insofar  dozens  of 

countries should converge on the same viewpoint. There exist several structures 

of  decision-making,  the  first  of  which  is  unanimous  voting  that  requires  all 

member states to agree in order for the decision to be implemented. This applies 

to  taxation,  social  security,  the  accession  of  new  members,  Common  Foreign 

and Security Policy (CFSP), Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) and 

operational  police  cooperation  (Official  Journal  of the European Union, 2021). 

Another type of voting is Qualified Majority Voting (QVM), or double majority 

voting,  which  reflects  two  necessary  conditions  to  be  simultaneously  met  in 

order  for  the decision to come true: 55% of members states agree (typically 15 

out  of  27)  and the proposal is approved by the member states that represent no 

less than 65% of the total EU population (Treaty of the European Union, 1992). 

The  Ordinary  Legislative  Procedure  (OLP)  involves  the  proposal  by  the 

European  Commission  as  the  first  step,  the  executive  body  consisting  of  27 

representatives overall - one from each country, and a simple majority is enough 

to initiate the proposal (14 out of 27). It is important to mention that at the time 

of the crisis the European Union was composed of 28 members as Great Britain 

was  a part of it, so there was a need for a larger proportion (15 out of 28). The 

second  step  is  the  approval  by  the  European  Parliament(EP)  with  a  simple 

majority  system  as  well,  where  the  seat  allocation  is  based  on  the principle of 

degressive  proportionality  (nowadays  705  members),  that  is  the distribution of 

16 

 
 
seats  based  on  the  population  but  with  a  slight  over-representation  of 

small-population  states.  The  European  Parliament  is  empowered  to  refuse  the 

law  and  send  it  back  for  modification  by  the  Commision.  After  successful EP 

approval  the  initiative  is  supervised  by  the  Council  of  the  European  Union, 

where one government minister from each member state represents the country's 

interests of the current governments. It can likewise suggest amendments, deny 

or  accept  the  law.  Its  decision-making  is  based  on  the  Qualified  Majority 

System.  Afterwards  there  are  several  rounds for the EP and Council of the EU 

to agree upon the initiative with an option of Conciliation Committee creation to 

resolve the controversies. Both institutions are obliged to approve the final draft 

of  the  text  in  order  for  it  to  become  a  law.  The  laws  created  via  OLP  have  a 

fundamental 

institutional  power  of  ‘direct  effect’, 

implying  automatic 

come-in-force  across  the  whole  territory  of  the  European  Union.  The 

understanding  of  such  nuances  is  of  much  importance  in  the  context  of 

exploring  the  EU  response  to  the  crisis,  its  lack  of  effectiveness  and 

coordination,  inner  fragmentation  on  migration  and  security  policies,  and 

EU-Italy relations.   

The  current  migration  policy  time  frame  begins  in  April  2015  when the 

formal  meeting of EU Commissioners takes place due to security concerns and 

intention  for 

internal  solidarity  for  smugglers  dying  in  the  sea.  The 

Commissioners  formulated  the  migration  agenda  as  the  need  for  shared 

responsibility,  increased  tolerance,  but  at  the  same  time  fighting  the  illegal 

migration,  establishing  local  operations  like  EUCAP  Sahel  Niger  to  assist  in 

preventing  smuggling,  and  organizing  the  summits  like  Valletta  Summit  on 

Migration  in  November  2015.  The EU also established operation EUNAVFOR 

Med  in  May  2015,  referring  to  a  comprehensive  response  in  combating 

sea-crossing,  as  a  formal  start  of  operational  strategy-planning  for  the  naval 

forces.  By  the  end  of  May 2015, the European Commision announced the first 

package of proposals that included the emergency relocation of 40.000 refugees 

17 

 
from  Italy  and  Greece,  as well as 20.000 from abroad, precise plan on fighting 

smuggling,  and  recommendations  on  fingerprinting  (European  Commission, 

2015).  The  proposal  went directly to the Council of the European Union under 

Article  78(3  TFEU)  that  implied  using  QMV  in  decision-making  on  the 

migration  agenda,  along with excluding the European Parliament’s compulsory 

role  (European  Parliament,  2020).  The  proposal  has  legally  been  approved 

though  facing  opposition  from  Eastern  parts  of  the European Union (Hungary, 

Slovakia,  Poland,  Czech  Republic).  Visegrad  Group  (V4)  countries  vainly 

applied  to  the  European  Court  of  Justice  (ECJ),  blaming  the  binding  decision 

illegitimate.  Later  on,  the  ECJ  began  infringement  procedures  against  Poland, 

Hungary  and  Czech  Republic  for  disobedience  as  countries  unilaterally closed 

their borders, built fences, and used military force to secure the national borders. 

This  was  the  starting  point  of  the  EU  political  split  over  migration  agenda, 

increase  in  ineffectiveness  and  inefficiency,  further  resulting  in  uncoordinated 

European  response  to  the  crisis.  While  the  total  refugee  inflow  into  the 

European  Union  exceeded  one  million  in  2015,  Italy  accounted  for  more  than 

150.000,  with  exceptionally  peaked  numbers  between  April  and  September 

(International  Organization  for  Migration,  2015).  With  the  rising  numbers  of 

incoming refugees, the European Commission published the second package of 

proposals  in  the  beginning  of  September  2015,  which  listed  the  following 

aspects:  emergency  relocation  of  120.000  refugees,  a  permanent  relocation 

mechanism  for  all  members  states,  a  more  effective  return  policy,  and 

establishment of the trust fund for Africa (European Commission, 2015). At the 

same  time  the  second  phase  of  EUNAVFOR  Med  begins, that is the boarding, 

search,  seizure  and  diversion  of  the  smuggler’s  vessels  under  the  appropriate 

international  law,  as  the  first  phase  -  deployment  of  naval  forces  -  is  now 

complete  (The European External Action Service, 2018). In the same period of 

time  the  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  Council  on  migration  adopted  the  final 

decision for relocation of 40.000 refugees from Italy and Greece, increasing the 

18 

 
number  to  120.000  1  week  later,  as  well  as  intensified  its  support  towards 

operations  TRITON  2015  and  POSEIDON  2015  by  the  European  Agency  for 

the  Management  of  Operational  Cooperation  at the External Borders (Frontex) 

on a par with EUNAVFOR Med (Council of the European Union, 2015). It is of 

the  same  importance  to  mention  the  Dublin  Regulation  (Regulation  (EU)  No 

604/2013)  that  prescribed  several  conditions  for  states’  responsibilities  and 

refugees’  conditionalities.  To  begin  with,  Article  7(2)  prescribes  the  Single 

Application  Rule  that  points  to  the  inability  to  apply  to  several  member-states 

(Official  Journal  of  the  European  Union  2013).  Additionally,  Article  13(1) 

outlines  the  Country  of  the  First  Entry  Rule,  meaning  the  state  of  entry  being 

responsible  for  examining  the  asylum  application  (Official  Journal  of  the 

European Union 2013). The Dublin Regulation conditionalities of 2013 put high 

pressure  on the states of Greece and Italy to handle such inflow of refugees, as 

the  member  states  were  initially  responsible  for  handling  with  the  incomers, 

though relocation proposals came in force. What is even more crucial is that the 

refugees  seeked  the  Northern parts of the European Union that proposed better 

conditions  like  a  more  developed  economy,  higher  subsidies  and  standard  of 

living.  Given  the  ambitions  to  move  northward,  Single  Application  and  First 

Entry  Rules,  the  refugees  avoided  interaction  with  state  representatives 

(especially  fingerprinting)  while  trying  to  move  deeper  in  the  Schengen  Area, 

practicing  the  ‘asylum  shopping’  (Open  Migration,  2019).  It  has  therefore 

complicated  the  track  and  management  of  refugees  as  a  whole.  In  the  end  of 

October  2015,  the  Luxembourg  presidency  triggered  the  Integrated  Political 

Crisis  Response  (IPCR)  on  the  mode  of  information  sharing,  requesting  more 

coordinated actions by the structures of the EU (Council of the European Union, 

2015). The decision was driven by the exacerbating conditions of the crisis and 

EU’s  inability  to  properly  track  and  manage  the  migratory  inflows.  IPCR 

provided concrete tools like universal web-platform, roundtables and Integrated 

Situational  Awareness  and  Analysis  (ISAA)  reports,  suggesting  intensified 

19 

 
collaboration  and  additional  allocation  of  resources  (Council  of  the  European 

Union,  2018).  By  the  mid  of  January  2016,  the  Foreign  Affairs  Council 

concluded  the  enforcement  of  the  High  Seas  UN  Security  Council  Resolution 

2240  within  the  framework  of  the  EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia, that is 

combating  human-trafficking  from  the  territory  of  Libya  and  off  its  coast 

(Official  Journal  of  the  European Union, 2016). The European Union has been 

allocating enormous amounts of money abroad to assist the displaced people by 

basic  human  needs  provision.  Thereby the European Council President Donald 

Tusk pledged the 3 billion euros of EU contribution in the lives of IDP Syrians 

as  well  as  hosting  communities  abroad  in  London  conference,  February  2016 

(European  Council,  2016).  The  day  before,  member  states  agreed  on  how  to 

finance  the  EU  refugee  facility  in  Turkey  with  an  approved  sum  of  3  billion 

euros 

(European  Council,  2016).  The  opposition 

to  aforementioned 

contributions,  besides  permanent  Visegrad  Group,  appeared  to  be  Austria  and 

Netherlands.  Most  of  the  opposition  representatives  claimed  the  deal-making 

with  the  authoritarian  Turkish  government  that  violates  basic  human  rights  is 

perilous  and ineffective. Hungary openly resisted the plan, while other skeptics 

just  criticised  the  plan  but  contributed.  So  did  Italy,  the  government  of  which 

was in a big favor of such measures, advocating for EU common burden-sharing 

and  responsibility.  The  Foreign  Affairs  Council  in  May  2016  extended  the 

EUNAVFOR  MED  Operation  Sophia  for  one  year,  as  well  as  sets  additional 

aims:  capacity  building and training of Libyan Navy and Coastguard, extended 

information-sharing  and  introduction  of  the  UN  arms  embargo (Council of the 

European  Union,  2016).  On  the  7th  of  June  2016,  the  European  Commission 

published  a  communication-partnership  framework  with  third  countries,  the 

core  notion  of  which  was  intensifying  interaction,  information-sharing, 

engagement,  and  extensive  investment  plan  to  humanely  combat  the  refugee 

problem. The EU planned to agree compacts with Niger, Nigeria, Senegal,Mali 

and Ethiopia, as well as providing additional support to the Libyan government 

20 

 
(Council  of  the  European  Union,  2016).  The  Council  of  the  EU  stated  its 

readiness  to  allocate  additional  8  billion  euros  within  2016-2020  given  all 

member-state  engagement,  and  potential  long-term  mobilisation  of  62  billion 

euros under the conditions of the international institutions full involvement and 

dedication  of  the  same  level  as  the  EU  supranational  bodies  (Council  of  the 

European Union, 2016). The plan clearly demonstrated the EU’s anxiety and its 

efforts to full-scale deployment of complex operations aimed at preventing such 

a  challenge  for  Europe,  still  with  high  emphasis  on  human  rights  even  at  the 

cost  of  European  wellbeing.  The  Council  of  the  European  Union  continued 

recommending  temporary  internal  border  checks  for  the  most  affected  states, 

including  Germany,  Austria,  Denmark,  Sweden  and  Norway  -  the  members of 

the EU that were the final destination for refugees, with up to 6 months of such 

regime being approved (Council of the European Union, 2016). In 2018 the EU 

supranational  bodies  approved  extra  3.7  billion  euros  to  eliminate  the  original 

causes  of  migration,  and  new  3  billion  euros  for  refugee  facilities  in  Turkey 

(Council of the European Union, 2016). The European Union capabilities failed 

to   handle  such  rapid  intervention,  and  many  members  decided  to  unilaterally 

build  barriers  and  deploy  an  army  to  prevent  the  inflow.  Those  actions  were 

against  the  EU law, spreading the clashes between the national governments of 

states  (predominantly  Hungary  and  Poland)  and  EU  supranational  structures 

(European  Court  of  Justice).  Therefore  Hungarian  border  barrier  with  Croatia 

and  Serbia  (2015),  Austrian  border  barrier  with  Slovenia  (2015),  Slovenian 

border  barrier  with  Croatia  (2015),  Macedonian  fence  with  Greece  (2015), 

Bulgaria-Turkey  barrier  (2016),  UK-France  Calais  border  barrier  (2016), 

Norway-Russia  border  barrier  (2016),  and  Poland-Russia  Kaliningrad  barrier 

(2020).  Some  of  the  constructions  were  heavily  criticised  by  the  EU  member 

states,  mainly  Visegrad  Group’  ones,  insofar  them  being  aimed  at  complete 

prevention  of  refugee  inflow,  while  others  built  to  ensure  management  and 

generate  conditions  for legally accounted migration. The European Commision 

21 

 
in 2017 started the infringement procedures against Hungary, Poland and Czech 

Republic,  referring  to  the  European Court of Justice (ECJ), for confronting the 

2015  Council  decisions  (European  Commission,  2017). The ECJ onward ruled 

the  violation  of  the  EU  law by 2020, however no penalties were imposed. The 

ECJ  warned  member  states  of  breaking  the  law,  with  potential  financial 

sanctions if they continue to move by confronting trajectory. The accused states 

restored  confronting  national  policy 

in  defiance  of  the  warnings  and 

infringement procedures by the EU supranational bodies, signalling the split not 

only by state policy (e.g Germany ‘Open Doors Policy’ and Hungarian national 

security-driven  policies)  ,  but  also  non-compliance  and  conflicting  attitude 

between  member  states  and  supranational  authorities.  In  2019  the  EU  set  a 

migration  policy  agenda  for 2019-2024 to continue working on comprehensive 

migration  strategies,  returns  of  refugees  to  home  countries  and  increased 

cooperation  with  Turkey  to  calm  down  the  situation.  With  regard  to  all 

aforementioned material, the paper may infer that the European Union appeared 

to  be  unprepared  to  the  2015  migration  crisis,  having  a  complex  multi-level 

decision  making,  increased  bureaucracy,  and  fragmented  opinions,  further 

resulting  in  slow,  ineffective  response,  confrontational  attitudes  within  the 

union,  disobedience  and non-compliance with supranational acts. Nevertheless, 

the EU deployed a full-scale engagement and management of the crisis, heavily 

investing  in  the  inner  migratory  structures,  along  with  financing  foreign 

operations and projects. With lack of rapid decision-making and polarization in 

migration policies, the European Union tried its best in managing and relocating 

the  migration  inflows.  The  most  important  point  is  that  managing  such inflow 

for  the  EU  meant  legal,  correctly  located,  subsidised  refugee  in  a  state  of 

wellbeing.  The  range  of  success  in handling the refugee crisis may come to be 

estimated  differently,  as  for  most  of  the  nation  states  it  primarily  mattered  the 

prevention of the inflows.  

22 

 
 
Italy's position in the context of the migration crisis 

The  issue  of  migration  has  long  been  prominent  for Italy, starting in the 

early 2000s,  and  seeing  its  first  peak  in  2011  with  the  advent  of  the  ‘North 

African  Emergency’,  the  chaotic  environment  in  the  Northern  part  of  Africa 

(primarily  Libya,  Tunisia  and  Egypt)  caused  by  the  Arab  Spring,  a  series  of 

protests  and  anti-government  political  militarized  movements.  The  Central 

Mediterranean  route  saw  the  first  solid  surge  of  refugees,  insofar  several  civil 

wars  in  Libya  and  the  end  of  Gadaffy’s  tyranny  destroyed  the  government 

apparatus and weakened its abilities to combat smugglers. Libya hence became 

the strategic point for all North Africans for traveling to Europe, with numerous 

smuggling  networks  being  available  through  the  Central  Mediterranean. Libya 

has been labelled a failed state since 2011, the one that cannot perform its basic 

duties,  i.e  security  and  development  functions.  Therefore  governmental  forces 

could  not  effectively  combat  the  trafficking  of  people,  making  Italy  the  most 

vulnerable  to  refugee  arrivals  on  a  par  with  Greece by geographical proximity 

and  temporal  conditionalities  (window  of  opportunity  to  illegally  travel  via 

Libya).  People  seeking  the  penetration to the European Union most commonly 

travelled  by  Turkey,  or  Libya.  Therefore,  the  consequences  of  the  ‘North 

African  Emergency’  has  shaped  the  foundation  for  further  demand  on  the 

Central Mediterranean route during the 2015 refugee crisis.  

The  state  of  Italy  together  with  Greece  formed  the  most  in-use  area  for 

refugee  arrivals:  Central  Mediterranean  route,  though  being  more  treacherous 

and  distant  than  Eastern  Mediterranean,  has  become  popular  for  North Africa, 

especially  Libya.  In  the  context  of  escaping  inner  state  instability,  refugees’ 

primary objective was to leave their home country’s territorial waters that were 

protected  by  national  navies,  and  afterward  count on rescue by the EU fleet or 

getting to their final destination independently. The aforementioned strategy has 

23 

 
 
led to numerous tragic sinkings, and the EU’s primary concern in the advent of 

the crisis implied assistance to refugees: saving the lives over security concerns. 

Even the Italian fleet while encountering the boats with refugees, in accordance 

with  domestic  and  international  standards,  had  to  deliver  the  people  to  Italy, 

insofar  home  countries  were  unfavourable  destinations  due  to  instability.  The 

Eastern  Mediterranean  route  largely  included  Turkey-to-Greece  path,  with 

minor  deviations  to  Bulgaria  and  Romania.  The  Aegean  Sea  appeared  to  be  a 

safer  alternative  for  refugees  due 

to  curtailed  distance,  and  Turkish 

companionability.  Some  less  popular  routes  included  Western  Balkans  - 

entrance  to  the  EU  via  the  former  Yougoslavian  states,  and  Western 

Mediterranean  -  chiefly  from  Morocco  to  Spain  (crossing  the  sea,  or  invading 

Melilla  and  Ceuta).  Geographic  conditionalities  played  a  key  role: Greece and 

Italy  jointly  totalled  1  million  arrivals  in  2015,  breaking  an  absolute  record  in 

comparison to other destinations: Spain (3.845), Bulgaria (29.959), Malta (106) 

and  Cyprus  (269)  (International  Organisation  for  Migration,  2015).  Italy  has 

experienced  the  inflow  of  324.000  refugees  for  2014  and  2015  combined,  an 

unprecedented  level  of  human  trafficking,  even  compared  to  2011  ‘North 

African Emergency’, that is the beginning of the Arab Spring in Egypt, Tunisia, 

Yemen, Syria and the start of the first civil war in Libya (Initiatives and Studies 

on  Multiethnicity,  2015).  For  Italy,  the  2015 refugee crisis started even before, 

when  the  government  launched  a  one-year  Operation  Mare  Nostrum  in  2013, 

aimed at rescuing migrants fleeing Northern Africa, with estimated saving of at 

least  150.000  people  (International  Organization  for  Migration,  2014).  The 

European  Commision  sponsored  Italy’s  naval  efforts,  providing  finance  by 

External  Borders  Fund.  The  operation  faced  criticism  by  the  UK  officials, 

namely  the  Foreign  Office  Minister  Baroness  Joyce  Anelay  and  Immigration 

Minister  James  Brokenshire,  who  claimed that the Italian operation serves as a 

‘pull factor’ for smugglers that will put even more people on insecure boats and 

anticipate  the  Italian  Navy  to  save  people.  Of  course  the  opinions  were 

24 

 
contested  by  the  international  organisation’s  officials,  like  International 

Organisation  for  Migration  and  Frontex,  with  the  former  praising  Italy  for 

life-saving efforts, and the latter denying the correlation between the Operation 

Mare  Nostrum  and  increased  smuggling.  Italy’s  economic  performance  and 

repayment  of  national  debt  has  been  problematic  over  decades,  especially 

demonstrated by the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 and Eurozone crisis in the 

mid  2010s.  Celidoni  et  al.  (2016)  in  the  analysis  within  Institute  for  Fiscal 

Studies  concluded  that  Italy  performed  the  most  dramatic  GDP  contraction by 

5%,  large  drop  in  consumer  expenditure,  calling  it  the  ‘Great  Recession’.  The 

World  Bank  accounts  for  -5,7%  of  GDP  per  capita  growth  in  2009.  The 

financial  crisis  of  2008  has  affected  the  Italian  economy  enormously,  further 

leading  to  the  Eurozone  crisis.  The group of Portugal, Italy, Greece, and Spain 

(PIGS), sometimes combined with Ireland (PIIGS), failed to repay national debt 

and  stuck  in  severe  interest  rates  within  the  national  economy,  creating 

instability  within  the  Eurozone,  where national economies tied with each other 

in  aspects  like  common  currency  and  fiscal  policy.  It  was  hence  even  more 

challenging  for  Italy  to  allocate  additional  finance  to  operations  aimed  at 

rescuing  of  refugees, settling and provisioning, as the economy remained weak 

and required assistance by the EU structures. The resource consisted not only of 

financial  aspect, but human, equipment, infrastructure and others that came out 

to  be  overloaded  by  an  overwhelming  number  of  incomers.  Therefore  the 

stemming  operations  of  Triton  (2014)  and  Sophia  (2015-2020)  were  primarily 

led  by  the  European  Union  and  coordinated  by  Frontex,  with  emphasis  on 

supranational  effort,  supported  by  Italy but as a supporting party, in as much it 

lacked  resources  to  conduct  national  operations.  Perhaps  joint  operations  with 

Libyan  Coast  Guard  may  only  be  considered  as  a  nationally  financed  effort, 

with  largely  training  and  equipping  of  Libyan  forces  to  safeguard  national 

waters  and catch fleeing refugees. Italy was one the most furious advocates for 

burden sharing within the member states of the European Union, often referring 

25 

 
to  itself  as a Southern EU frontier that is in need of coordinated assistance: the 

handling  of  rescuing  refugees  in  the  sea,  the  management  of  providing  basic 

necessities  in  the  land,  the  combating  of  unregistered  trafficking.  It  is  worth 

mentioning  the  role  of  Non-Governmental  Organisations’  assistance  to  the 

Mediterranean,  the  most  notable  of  which  were  Médicins  Sans  Frontières 

(MSF),  Save  the  Children,  and  International  Organization  for  Migration.  MSF 

has  conducted  a  ‘Search  and  Rescue’  operation  in  the  Mediterranean  in  2015, 

resulting  in  saving  thousands  of  refugees  and providing food and medical care 

to  them.  In  2016,  Save  the  Children  started  ‘Welcome  to  Europe’  program, 

which envisaged the help in Italian reception centers and support provision with 

the  future  of  refugee  children  arriving  by  Mediterranean.  As  a  result,  over 

10.000 documented children received emergency help, psychological assistance 

and  legal  aid  to unaccompanied and unprotected minors. In 2015, International 

Organisation  for  Migration  launched  ‘Mediterranean  Migration  Response’  by 

building  shelters,  providing  medical  care  and  information  dissemination  for 

migrants  that  arrived  in  Italy  and  Greece.  IOM  helped  over 100.000 people, it 

coordinated  reception  and  integration  of  them,  standing  by  the  Italian 

government  to  manage  the  inflows  more  effectively.  In  general,  Italian 

authorities  welcomed  such  efforts  by  IOs,  yet  with  some  instances  of tensions 

regarding the effect of such rescue efforts that may trigger more migration (‘Pull 

factors’  by  MST).  At  the  same  time,  Italy  continued  to  criticise  the  EU  for 

inconvenient  measures  and 

lack  of  solidarity,  stressing 

the  need  for 

burden-sharing. Regarding the aforementioned material, the paper may come to 

the  conclusion  that  Italy  has  been  engaged  in  migration  issues  way  before  the 

2015  refugee  crisis,  it  has  become  the  most  popular  way  of  getting  to  the 

European  Union  because  of  its  geographical  location  and  Libyan  previously 

established  smuggling  networks.  Italy  struggled  with  economic  hardships 

because  of  the  2008  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  was  one  of  the  drivers of the 

Eurozone  Crisis,  which  made  it  impossible  to  attract  more  funds  in  a  limited 

26 

 
pool of finance. It therefore failed to effectively manage the inflows of refugees, 

asking  for  burden-sharing  and  coordinated  response.  Conditionalities  like 

Dublin  Regulation  (country  of  arrival  principle)  put  responsibilities on Italy to 

finance  the  refugees  and  keep  them  in  the  country,  along  with  trying  to  catch 

illegal border crossings both to and from Italy, since most of the refugees seeked 

to the North of the EU, pursuing better conditions. The Dublin Regulation made 

it highly disproportionate since most of the refugees arrived in Greece and Italy, 

and  they  had  to  keep  and  provide  for  them.  Eventually  it  was  suspended  by 

Germany (Merkel’s Open Door policy) and eased by several states like Sweden 

and  Austria  in  the  second  half  of  2015, but the ineffective management within 

EU  complex  bureaucracy,  rapid crisis expansion, and lack of Greek and Italian 

resources made it a catastrophe within months.  

Migration flows as a factor of political and socio-economic development of 
Italy 

2.1 Political sphere 

2.1.1 Institutional and Electoral Structure of Italy 

The  existing  Parliamentary  system  of  Italy  functions  through  a 

multi-party  dynamics.  The  bicameral  Parliament  represents  the  legislative 

branch  of  the  Italian  Republic,  with  the  Senate  being the upper house, and the 

Chamber  of  Deputies  -  the  lower  house. The Senate nowadays takes shape via 

combined  processes  of  majoritarian  (37%  of  total  seats)  and  proportional 

representation  (63%)  systems  .  The  basic  functions  of  the  upper  house  are: 

participation  in  legislature  (amending,  approving),  ratifying  international 

treaties, the use of impeachment, and government supervision. The Senate does 

not  have  a  veto  power,  hence  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  may  override 

disapproval  and  adopt  the  same  draft  of  the  law  regardless  of  the  Senate  in 

27 

 
 
 
 
critical cases, where reaching consensus is surreal. One great example would be 

the passing of the 2015 Electoral Law Reform (Italicum), which was initiated by 

the Chamber of Deputies yet rejected by the Senate. Consequently, the Chamber 

of Deputies utilized its constitutionally guaranteed right to pass exactly the same 

version  of  law  despite  the  Senate's  anxiety  and  reluctance  to  approve  it. 

However,  bicameralism  means  two  equal  legislative  bodies,  and  even  so  the 

Chamber of Deputies has a right to override in some critical cases, this does not 

automatically infer the Senate's submissive role. The lower house, the Chamber 

of  Deputies, also has a mixed-member majoritarian representation with 37% of 

the  seats  distributed  in  accordance  to  the  first-past-the-post  voting (FPTP) and 

63%  by  proportional  representation. It also has a minority bonus to assist large 

parties.  Some  of  the  most  fundamental  functions  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies 

are:  initiating,  amending  and  approving  legislation,  government  oversight, 

forming  and  approving  the  budget  and  taxation,  ratifying  international  treaties 

and  the  use  of  impeachment  if  needed.  The  composition  of  both  houses  may 

seem identical, however there exist principal differences in the structure and the 

way  of  functioning.  To begin with, the Chamber of Deputies largely represents 

the  population  since  it  is  proportionally  formed  based  on  the  population  size, 

while  the  Senate  chiefly  speaks  for  the  regions  that  provide  their  regional 

interests  into  the  federal  politics  of  Italy.  The  Chamber  of  Deputies  has  more 

political  power  in  the  legislature,  namely  an  ability  to  override  the  denials  of 

drafts by the Senate, with the latter being unable to do so in this manner. Lastly, 

when  it  comes  to  government  oversight,  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  possesses 

more  influence  especially  in  confidence  votes  or  major  government  policies 

endorsing.  This  means  that  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  has  a  pivotal  role  in 

overseeing the government's legitimacy and the approval of policies vital for the 

country’s  economy.  The  Council  of  Ministers  being  the  principal  organ  of  the 

executive  branch,  consists  of  the  President  (usually  the  Prime  Minister  of  the 

state)  and  Ministers  that  are  both  appointed  by  the  Italian  head  of  state.  The 

28 

 
Italian  President  likewise  belongs  to  the  executive  branch,  together  with  the 

Council  of  Ministers  and  Prime  Minister  forming  the  government.  The 

government  is  responsible  for  the  following  functions:  policy  implementation 

(the  execution  of  laws  and  administration  of  the  country),  coordination  over 

internal & external affairs, defense industry and finance, the military command, 

and the right to take serious measures in case of emergency, meaning the threat 

to  national  security  and  stability.  The  Prime  Minister  does  not  have  a  veto 

power  on  bill-passing,  however  the  Head  of  the  Republic  does,  in  a  specific 

manner:  most  commonly  the  president  vetoes  when  the  draft  contradicts  the 

constitution, and if the Parliament decides to override, the president may appeal 

to  the  Constitutional Court to examine the legitimacy of such law-making. The 

judicial  branch  consists  of  the  Constitutional  Court  and  the  Supreme  Court  of 

Cassation,  with  the former overseeing constitutional legitimacy, and the latter - 

procedural  accuracy.  Therefore,  the  Republic  of  Italy  possesses  an  imperfect 

balance of power: the executive is dependent on legislative (direct appointment 

and vote of confidence), the judiciary (especially the Constitutional Court) may 

raise  attention  to  some  laws  and  annul  it,  however  far  from  authority  over 

blocking  all.  The  head  of  the  state  may  veto  legislation,  yet  only  through  the 

Constitutional  Court,  exactly  the  same  process.  Within  the  Parliament,  the 

Chamber of Deputies exercises way more power than the Senate, insofar it may 

override  the  appeals.  Therefore,  the  paper  intends  to  admit  the  Chamber  of 

Deputies the most influential structure that violates the balance of power within 

Italy.  The  issue  of  balance  of  power  has  long  been  a  central  pillar  in  political 

discussions  within  the  state  of  Italy,  and  many  legislative  initiatives  aimed  at 

fixing  this  imbalance  were  proposed,  with  only  a  few  becoming  a  law. 

Nonetheless,  the  issue  was  not  the  change  of  the  balance  of  power  between 

branches,  but  rather  the  electoral  process  and  regional  representation  in 

government.  Rich  North  (e.g Lombardy, Veneto) and poor South (e.g Calabria, 

Sicily)  unevenly  shared  the  power  in core governmental structures. The North, 

29 

 
being highly industrialized and developed in terms of trade, finance and overall 

economic  indicators,  had  long  been  holding  more  political  power  than  the 

mostly  agricultural,  underdeveloped  and  economically  weak  South.  The 

electoral  system  of  Italy  has  experienced  numerous  amendments:  Matarellum 

(1993-2005),  Porcellum  (2005),  Italicum(2015),  and  Rosatellum  (2017), 

Constitutional  Reform  (2020)  -  all  aimed  at  fixing  the  imperfections  of  the 

electoral  system  by  shifting  focus  on  regional  representation  yet  trying  to 

compensate  with  majority  bonuses  or  shortage  in  number  of  seats  to  uphold 

efficiency of the government. The Italian political system embodies divergency 

in  regions,  views  of  the  coalitions,  and  extent  of  exercising  power  in 

governmental structures, at the same time Italian Republic struggles to maintain 

the  balance  between  the  regional  representation  (via  electoral  reforms)  and 

efficiency  (by  decreasing  the  number of state officials, relying on less political 

fragmentation).  

2.1.2 Coalition Dynamics and Political Instability: Political Conditionalities and 

Structural Limitations (2006–2013) 

With  regards  to  the  partly  representation  within  the  federal  politics  of 

Italy, it is reasonable to begin by outlining the structure before the refugee crisis, 

and  shortly  outline  the  ruling  coalitions  even  prior  to  the  North  African 

Emergency,  to  fully  comprehend  and  calculate the proportions of changes, and 

further  analyse  transformation of migration agenda. The paper intends to begin 

by  outlining  the  2006  general  election, a highly competitive federal election to 

Parliament  of  the  Italian  Republic  with  two  major  coalitions.  The  House  of 

Freedoms,  a  centre-right  political  coalition  with  Forza Italia (Centre-right) and 

National  Alliance  (National-conservative)  as  two  leading locomotives on a par 

with  minor  parties 

like  Union  of  Christian  and  Centre  Democrats 

(Christian-democratic)  and  Northern  League  (Regionalism)  participated  in  the 

elections. The leader, Silvio Berlusconi, struggled to reunite the opposition into 

30 

 
 
a  strong  alliance to increase competency after the collapse of its Cabinet in the 

90s,  particularly  caused by tense relations between National Alliance and Lega 

Nord  and withdrawal from the latter. The reason was that Lega Nord requested 

greater regional autonomy, and the government’s federalist policies did not fully 

reflect  and  address  the  issue  of  regionalism,  being  a  central  pillar  within  the 

Lega Nord. The second alliance was The Union, a centre-left coalition of parties 

predominantly  led  by  Democrats  of  the  Left  (Social-democratic),  The  Daisy 

(Christian-left,  social-liberal)  and  including  other  less  popular  parties  like 

Communist  Refoundation  Party  (communist),  Rose  in  the  First  (liberal, 

social-democratic) and others. The head, Romano Prodi, was at that time current 

Prime-Minister  of  Italy  and  Former  President  of  the  European  Commision. 

During  the  General  Election  of  2006,  the  House  of  Freedoms  experienced  the 

withdrawal  of  the  Union  of  Christian  and  Central  Democrats,  explaining  it  by 

ideological  controversies  with  the  Lega  Nord  and  National  Alliance  and 

disagreements  over  policy  orientation.  With  hesitant  victory  of  The  Union  by 

20.755  votes,  and  turnout  over  38  million,  and  respective  number  of  votes  in 

favor of the Union of Christian and Central Democrats (UdC) being 2.580.190, 

the paper derives the defeat of the centre-right coalition was a result of the loss 

of  support  by  the  UdC  (International  Foundation for Electoral Systems, 2006). 

Nevertheless,  the  newly  elected  government  under  the  rule  of  the  Prodi 

collapsed in 2008, due to withdrawal of the Communist Refoundation Party and 

a  loss of confidence vote in the Senate. The debates included the government’s 

foreign  policy,  more  precisely  Italy’s  involvement  in  Afghanistan.  Inter-party 

fragmentation  began,  with  Prodi’s  supporters  blaming  the  communists  for 

sabotage, and them in response accusing Prodi of not following anti-war stance. 

The coalition likewise possessed fragmented views on how to combat economic 

hardship  (i.e  existing  rising debt and economic stagnation), and the persistence 

of  the  European  Union  for  Italy  to  introduce  reforms  (fiscal  austerity  and 

structural  changes)  was  strongly  opposed  by  the  communists.  What  is  more, 

31 

 
ideological  controversies  persisted  over  time,  personal  rivalries  between  the 

leaders of parties that all participated in abnormal fragility of the coalition. The 

economic  governance  with  slow  recovery,  floating GDP and rising debt fueled 

discontent in coalition. All in all, the alliance appeared to be highly fragmented, 

polarized,  and  inefficient  -  with  loss  of  confidence  and incapacity to arrange a 

caretaker  government  due  to  excessively  divided  political  landscape,  a  2008 

snap  general  election  was  held.  As  a  result,  the  newly  formed  right  coalition 

under Silvio Berlusconi won by a large margin of almost 10% by popular vote, 

and  received  55%  of  seats  both  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  and  Senate, 

possessing  an  absolute  majority.  The  rule  of  the  Prime-Minister  Berlusconi 

ended  in  2011  with  respective  resignations,  as the country plunged into a deep 

economic  crisis  (higher  public  debt,  recession,  unemployment)  and  migration 

debates,  along  with  loss  of  parliamentary  majority  because  of  withdrawal  of 

Future  of  Freedom  and  Union  of  the  Centre  support.  President  Napolitano 

appointed  Mario  Monti  with  a  technocratic  government,  which  was  supported 

by  an  overwhelming  number  of  political  parties  (The  People  of  Freedom, 

Democratic  Party  and  Union  of  the  Centre).  However,  there  was  no  absolute 

majority  in  the  Parliament,  making  the  system  highly  inefficient,  with  the 

People of Freedom (PdL) and Democratic Party (PD) being political rivals, and 

Union of the Centre - a mediator. There was no common political approach and 

similarity  of  views.  By  the  second  half  of  2012,  Monti  resigned  due  to 

withdrawal  of  PdL  support  and  Berlusconi’s  accusations  of  Monti  being  too 

submissive  to  EU  requirements  harming  Italian  economy  (tax  increases, 

austerity  measures,  pension  reforms)  and  deepening  the  economic catastrophe, 

triggering  earlier  2013  general  elections.  The  aforementioned  political 

conditionalities  of  Italy  are  critical  (institutional  disbalance,  fragmentation  of 

alliances,  instability  of  parliament  coalitions),  insofar  it  has  become  the 

structural  limitation,  in  the  framework  of  which  Italy  came  across  the  EU 

refugee  crisis.  Due  to  constantly  happening  dissolutions  of  the  governments, 

32 

 
inter-party  splits  and  conflict  of  interests  between  the  North  and  South,  the 

country appeared to be unable to establish a coherent and sustainable migration 

strategy, with governments acting situationally in a short-term perspective under 

the  pressure  of  coalitional  and  electoral  interests.  The  migration  issue  has 

become the field of political competition, not systematic management.  

2.1.3 The Impact of the Refugee Crisis on Party Politics (2013–2018) 

The  state  of  Italy  faced  the  EU refugee crisis in the composition formed 

via  2013  general  elections.  The  centre-left  forces  established  a  new  coalition 

called ‘Italy. Common Good’,consisting of two locomotives - Democratic Party, 

and  Left  Ecology  Freedom,  with  some  minor participants. It won the elections 

by  a  0.37%  margin  from  the  centre-right  coalition,  and  received  55%  seats  in 

the  Chamber  of  Deputies.  The  centre-right  coalition,  led  by  The  People  of 

Freedom,  together  included  medium  size  parties  like  Northern  League  and 

Brothers of Italy, along with many small parties that did not pass the threshold. 

Yielding a little, it only received 19.8% of seats in the Chamber of Deputies due 

to a bonus system. The third significant political force, the Five Star Movement 

populist  party,  winning  any  party  in  terms  of  popular  vote  for  party,  but  not 

allying  with  anyone  else,  received  17.3% of seats. The Senate seat distribution 

appeared  to  be  non-majoritarian,  with  both  three  main  powers  combined.  The 

centre-left  forces  dominated  the  government  insofar  the  withdrawal  of 

Berlusconi  coalition  support  and  further  formation  of  new  Forza  Italia. 

Therefore,  Italy’s  government  structure  consisted  of  a  left-centrist  majority  in 

the  Chamber  of  Deputies  (legislative)  and  Council  of  Ministers  (executive), 

with  possibility  of  gridlock  only  by  Senate’s  statements  or  judiciary  records. 

The  government  collapsed  in  less  than  a  year  following  the  withdrawal  of 

Berlusconi  and  formation  of new Forza Italia in 2014. The new government of 

Matteo Renzi came into office in 2014, and with the advent of the refugee crisis 

continuing  the  Mare  Nostrum  and  calling  for  European  solidarity.  Renzi 

33 

 
castigated  the  EU’s  actions,  calling  it  a  ‘bureaucratic  perversion’, meaning the 

EU’s  reluctance to compensate migratory expenses from the budget deficit. The 

relocation  scheme  has  fueled  intra-state  controversies within the EU, as Italian 

suggestions  of  relocating  refugees  faced  opposition  by  Hungary,  Slovakia, 

Czech  Republic  and  Romania.  Some  of  the  members  abstained  -  the  United 

Kingdom,  Denmark  and  Finland.  Renzi  later  on  shamed  abstaining  and 

opposing  states  for  not  sharing  the  burden  of  the  common  EU  problem, 

spreading  the  internal  fragmentation  on  the  refugee  issue. In June 2015, Renzi 

intimidated  the  EU  by  imposing  unilateral  measures  like  refugee  processing 

camps 

in  Libya.  The  EU’s  response  appeared  to  be  protective,  with 

supranational  bodies  agreeing  on  relocating  refugees,  but  stressing  no  need  in 

menaces.  The  Visegrad  Group  countries,  in  contrast,  negated  the  idea  of 

redistribution  and  escalated  the  disagreements  between  the  member  states  on 

migration  policy.  Renzi’s  government  has  been  heavily  criticized  for  its 

insufficient  policies  and  ever  counting  on  the  EU  burden  sharing.  In  2015 

Salvini  launched  a  Northern  League  Rally,  with  thousands  of  participants, 

against immigration, the European Union membership and Renzi’s government. 

Salvini  speeches  were  translated  via  X  (former  Twitter)  by  personal  official 

account  and  Northern  League  official  account.  Salvini  advocated  for complete 

naval blockade in 2015, he accused the Democratic Party of racism as it offered 

monetary  reward  for  companies  hiring  refugees,  calling  them  ‘fake’(Salvini, 

2015).  Salvini  likewise  identified the problem of confusing the ‘fake’ migrants 

and  refugees  that  actually  escaped  the  war.  He  also  criticised  democratic 

government for providing subsidies, comparing it to well building in the village 

and  the  struggle  with  earthquakes  (Salvini,  2016).  He  revealed that the cost of 

hosting  a  refugee  is  35  euro  per  day,  with  Berlusconi  claiming  the  actual 

refugees being 10.000 out of 630.000 migrants. The cost of hosting a refugee in 

Northern African camps is 3 euros per day, calling it an economic disaster. With 

the  highly  inefficient  bicameral  system  of  the  parliament  and  numerous 

34 

 
gridlocks  caused  by  the  multi-coalitional  structure  of  the  Senate,  Renzi’s 

government  law  initiation  efficacy  was  close  to  zero.  Reforms  were  mainly 

blocked, or delayed, further leading to the 2016 Constitutional Reform proposal 

by Renzi. It chiefly proposed the decrease of legislative power of the Senate, in 

order  to make the Chamber of Deputies the main organ responsible for making 

the legislature. Renzi was charged for violating the balance of power and trying 

to  centralize the power in the hands of the Prime Minister by Forza Italia, Five 

Star  Movement,  Northern  League  and  even  by  leftists  of  his  own  Democratic 

party.  The  referendum  was  held,  with  59.1%  voting  against,  triggering 

immediate resignation of Renzi and admittance of the failure (Italian Ministry of 

Internal  Affairs,  2016).  The  new central figure, a democrat and Minister of the 

Internal Affairs, Marco Minniti rather ruled a caretaker government till the next 

elections,  with  exactly  the  same  balance  of  power  within  governmental 

structures, in some cases with even less support (subtracted by the leftists of the 

Democratic  Party).  Minniti  signed  several  agreements  with  Libya  on 

intercepting the boats before reaching international waters and on equipping and 

training Libyan military, facing criticism and being shamed for violating human 

rights  and  supporting  militias  with  abusive  conditions.  He  also  worked  on  the 

Code  of  Conduct  for  NGOs,  proclaiming  specific  conditions  on  search  and 

rescue,  resulting in sharp decrease of its activities and arrivals of refugees. The 

Democratic Party, slightly before the 2018 General Elections, understanding the 

collapse  of  its  government  and  at  most  policies,  internal  fragmentation  and 

inability to govern effectively, started the campaign against the Northern League 

and  fast-growing  Salvini  with  a  hard  stance  on  the  refugee  issue.  The 

Democratic  Party  and  Minniti  warned  the electorate that the political stance of 

the  Northern  League  may  result  in international isolation, withdrawal from the 

EU,  and  the  end  of  democracy  in  Italy.  The  Five  Star  Movement continued to 

position  itself  as  a  central  populist  force  without  belonging  to  any  coalition 

(though  in  2018  allying  with  the  League  anyways),  criticised  the  Democratic 

35 

 
Party  of  being  corrupt,  inefficient  and  elite-benefiting.  It  proclaimed  less 

extreme  solutions  to the existing issues, including not only migratory ones, but 

remaining  economic  problems  like  unemployment and corruption. It possessed 

skepticism  in  EU  membership  but  did  not  denote  a  clear  will  to  leave.  It 

promised  stricter  border  controls,  citizen’s  income,  lower  taxes,  to  reduce 

immigration  in  general  and  revise  the  EU  rules  claiming  it  to  be  harmful  for 

Italy. The coalition of the right, with the protagonist being Northern League and 

with  support  of  the  Forza  Italia,  shared  different  approaches  aimed  at  similar 

objectives.  Lega  promised  mass  deportation  of  refugees  (approximately 

400.000),  ‘Italy  first’ economic policies, flat tax of 15% for all, and opposition 

to mandatory EU rules like borders and budget. It positioned itself as a far-right 

nationalist, anti-EU and populist political party that used failures of the previous 

governments and remaining problems to get the support of the electorate. Forza 

Italia, in its turn,  promised to stay in the EU but push for reform, evict irregular 

refugees and flat tax form 15 to 23 %, placing itself as center-right, pro-EU and 

liberal-conservative political force. All in all, it is clear that the result of another 

government collapse and shifts in Italian political structure was caused not only 

by  the  approach  of  the  ruling  party,  but  political  conditionalities  (i.e  hung 

Parliament  at  that  time,  constant  gridlocks  and  inefficiency),  and  the 

combination of factors participated in it, namely the reluctance, bureaucracy and 

inefficiency of the EU, the populist slogans used by the opposition to frame the 

crisis and reconfigure the electorate, and the actual reflection and feeling of the 

failure  via  invasion  of  the  refugees  into  the  lives  of  Italian  citizens  (everyday 

sensitive  issue).  The  failure  of  the government and respective populist rhetoric 

to  address  mass  needs  used  by  the  right-wing  coalition  and  the  Five  Star 

Movement  increased  the  chances  of  the  opposition  to  occupy  the  seats  in  the 

Parliament,  at dawn of the 2018 General Elections. In 2015, Italy’s sea arrivals 

were  153.842  refugees,  in  2016  -  181.436, and in 2017 - 119.369 (Operational 

Data Portal, 2025) : totalling more than 450.000 refugees, with failed relocation 

36 

 
scheme,  collapse  of  the  government,  irregular  migration,  economic  hardship, 

EU  inter-state  debates,  inefficiency  of  legislature  and  political  fragmentation  - 

in such chaotic environment the 2018 General Elections were held.  

2.1.4 Electoral Outcomes and Parliamentary Shifts (2018 General Elections) 

The  right-wing  coalition  received  the  most  electoral  support  (265  total 

seats out of 630 = 42%), with Lega’s biggest ever support rising from 16 to 125 

seats  (+681.25%).  The  M5S  party  came  out  the  second,  totalling  227  seats 

compared  to  108  in  2013  General  Elections  (an  increase  by  110.2%).  The 

centre-left  coalition,  being  the  third  power,  accounted  for  a  total  of  122  seats, 

with the Democratic Party intensely losing its electorate (from 292 seats in 2013 

to 112 in 2018,  a decrease by 61.64%). With the new Rosatellum (2017) law, as 

mentioned  previously,  none  of  the  coalitions  receive  an  automatic  bonus  if 

crossing  a  40%  of  seats.  In  any  way,  the  center-right  coalition  in  the  popular 

national  vote  acquired  only  37%,  which means even under the Italicum (2015) 

law  the  coalition  could  not  obtain  the  bonus  seats.  Therefore,  the  hung 

parliament  with  no  clear  majority  was  formed,  meaning  the  obstructed 

decision-making  through  consensus  between  the  rival  parties,  and  potential 

questioning  of  promises  given  during  the  campaigns,  since  none  of the parties 

had an absolute power of sticking to its own policies. What made the issue even 

more  complex  is  the  newly  established  balancing  structure  of  the  Senate, 

inasmuch  it  similarly  represented  three  political  powers  with  none  of  them 

possessing  an  absolute  majority  over  political  processes.  The  centre-right 

coalition, being the most popular among the population, received 137 out of 315 

seats (42.86% after final seat distribution), with Lega’s support rising from 19 to 

58  seats  (205.26%  increase).  The  Five  Star  Movement  totalled  112  seats 

(35.56%),  demonstrating  a rise by 58 seats (107.41%). The coalition of the left 

received 60 seats in total (18.41%), with the Democratic Party accounting for 53 

seats,  compared  to  110  in  2013  (51.82%  decrease).  The Democratic Party was 

37 

 
not a sole party losing voter preferences, the Forza Italia likewise experienced a 

solid decline in the 2018 General Election. However, FI lost its support only in 

the  Senate,  receiving  57  seats  compared  to  98  previously  (41.84%),  and 

remained  in  the  same  position  within the Chamber of Deputies. The fall of the 

Forza  Italia  is  usually  referred  to  the  age  of  the  party’s  leader  Berlusconi,  his 

noncompliance  with  dynamic  political  landscape,  several  scandals,  and 

traditional  views  of  the  party  on  the  issues  (compared  to  populist  and 

anti-establishment  mottos  of  the  new  locomotive  of  the  right  coalition,  and 

differing  in  terms  of approach but similarly anti-establishment and populist the 

Five Star Movement). The right coalition rather redistributed the votes between 

the  two  major  parties,  and  increased  its  total  support  as  well.  While  the  left 

alliance  lost  electoral  support,  yielding  to  the  non-affiliative  Five  Star 

Movement and the right coalition.    

Figure №1   Seat distribution change between major coalitions, Chamber 

of Deputies, Italy, 2013-18 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

38 

 
 
Based on the graph, it is logical to infer that the coalitional balance of power has 

dramatically  changed  towards  right-wing  (22.26%  rise  in  seats)  ,  with  the 

independent  Five  Star  Movement  (18.78%  rise)  forming  the  coalitional  rule 

together  with  the  Northern  League  via  government.  The  former  opposition, 

though being two divergent political forces, jointly redistributed more than 40% 

of  new  seats  ,  indicating  a  stronger  support  by  the  electorate.  The  left-wing 

coalition yielded more than 35% of total seats, displaying failed governance and 

stemming  public  dissatisfaction/reorientation  towards  alternative  political 

powers.  

Figure №2  Refugee Inflow to Italy and Governments, 2013-18 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  the  UNHCR 

Operational Portal – Mediterranean Situation 

The graphs altogether demonstrate a strong tendency of correlation between the 

refugee inflow and the decline of the left coalition. The paper reflects the Letta 

government  collapse  in  2014  and  Renzi  resignation  in  2016  as  two  stemming 

events from two peaks of the refugee incoming. These institutional shocks gave 

space  for  populist  slogans  being  utilized  by  the  opposition  and  compounded 

public skepticism. The weak humanitarian approach conducted by the left-wing 

coalition  and  its  over-reliance  on  technocratic  government  alienated  key  voter 

39 

 
 
blocks.  Overall,  the  data  reveal  an  apparent  link  between  the  migratory 

pressures  and  the internal political transformation in Italy. The sudden collapse 

of  the  centre-left  and  the  simultaneous  rise  of  right-wing  and  populist  parties 

indicate  a  major  realignment,  with  migration  serving  the  dual  role  of 

precipitating party-switching voters and as a stand-in for deeper-seated concerns 

regarding  globalization,  sovereignty,  and  governance.  The  M5S-League 

electoral  victory  in  March  2018  is  an expression of population discontent with 

the  manner  in  which  the  centre-left  had  handled  the  migration  crisis.  The 

precipitous  decline  in  refugee  volumes  that  has  followed  is  a  reflection  of  the 

success of the new government's more restrictive immigration policies. 

Figure №3   Changes in Seats in Italian Chamber of Deputies by Parties, 

Coalitions and Government Alliance, 2013-18 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

The  following graph demonstrates repartition of political power between major 

political parties within the Chamber of Deputies by 2018, illustrating the fall of 

the  Democratic  Party  by  62.3%,  the  largest  political  party  in  the  period  of 

2013-18.  The  two  most  prominent  political  parties  of  the  left  in  total  lost  222 

40 

 
 
seats,  while  the  largest  parties  of  the  opposition  gained  256  seats  (M5S  - 118, 

right-wing  coalition  -  138).  The  number  slightly  exceeds  the  loss  of  the  left, 

which may be referred to as minor changes (losses) by secondary parties, yet it 

is  evident  that  the  electorate  reoriented  towards  the  right-wing  and  populist 

political parties, alienating from the leftist ones.  

Figure №4  Italian Senate Party Distribution, 2013-18  

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

The  tendency of voter reorientation and stronger support to alternative political 

views  is  similarly  visible  in  comparing  graph  of  the  Senate  seat  distribution 

between  the  parties  by  2013  and  2018  General  elections.  The  left  coalition 

analogously  lost  a  large  number  of  seats  (52.3%),  yielding  to  both  right-wing 

coalition  and  the  Five  Star  Movement.  The  M5S  rose  almost  by  the  same 

number  (107.4%  rise  in total seats in the Senate vs. 108.3% in the Chamber of 

Deputies).  In  the  right  coalition,  despite  solid  gains  of  the  Northern  League 

(222.2%  of  its  total), the Forza Italia compensated the gain by losing 41.8% of 

its  seats,  with  both percentages being almost the same number of seats (loss of 

41 

 
 
41  by  FI,  gain  of  39  by  the  League)  .  Nevertheless,  in total the alliance of the 

right-wing parties still rose by 14.7%, underlining the attraction of a new part of 

the  electorate  believing  in  its  political  viewpoints.  The  respective  total gain of 

the  opposition  in  the  past  was  44.1%.  The  right  wing  since  then  occupied 

42.86% of the total Senate seats, M5S - 35.56%, and declining leftists - 18.41%. 

Therefore,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  left  coalition  similarly  lost  a  huge 

proportion of the electorate’s support.   

Figure №5  Italian Senate Share by coalition, 2013-18 

Source:   Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

The following graph indicates dynamics in the Italian Senate, clearly showing a 

serious  decline  of  the  left  wing  coalition  (-52.9%),  and  ambitious  rise  of  the 

M5S(108%) yet moderate increase of seats for the right-wing coalition (15.5%). 

The  numbers  are  final  for  coalitional  comparison  insofar  in  previous  graphs 

only  locomotives  of  the  alliances were taken, summarized and analyzed.   With 

regard  to  all  analyzed  graphs,  it  is  apparent  that  the  EU  refugee  crisis  has 

affected Italian internal political structure by shifting voter preferences towards 

42 

 
 
the  right-wing  coalition  (with  Northern  League  as  a  leader)  and  the  populist, 

chiefly of the same viewpoint with the right-wing but less radical, the Five Star 

Movement,  becoming  the  second  political  force  and  leaving  the  former  ruling 

centre-left  alliance  behind  in  both  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  and  the  Senate  of 

the Italian Republic.  

Another 

important  aspect 

to  be  examined 

to  complement 

the 

comprehensive view of shifts within Italian politics is the landscape of political 

protests.  

Figure №6 Refugee-Related Protests in Italy, 2015-2020 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Amnesty 

International,  Pew  Research  Center  and  International  Organization  for 

Migration  

The  graph  demonstrates  a  clear  trend  of  anti-refugee  protests  being  popular 

during  peak  years  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis  under  the  Democratic  government. 

The  only  one  pro-refugee  protest  was  held  in  2017  by  the  ruling  Democratic 

party and a large number of participants - approximately 100.000 people. All the 

other  protests,  though  being  not  that  numerous,  expressed  anti-establishment 

and  anti-refugee  sentiments.  The  rally  against  Renzi  and  his  Constitutional 

Reform  took  place  in Rome with roughly 30.000 participants. The anti-refugee 

43 

 
 
protest  (10.000  participants)  in  Rome  2016,  Casale San Nicola protest, Gorino 

refugee  block,  Rome  pro-Lega  rally  and  Piazza  Indipendenza  eviction  of 

refugees  by  locals  -  all  these  events  took  place  between  2015-2018,  showing 

population’s  resentment  with  the  migratory  issue,  pro-refugee  policies  and 

democratic  party  governance  in  general.  Yet,  after  2018  the  refugee  protests 

largely  disappear,  with  the  population  switching  the  focus  towards  the  rise  of 

nationalism and exclusionary politics. The migration becomes a secondary issue 

because  of  the  decreasing  numbers  of arrivals, and the protests follow the idea 

of  protecting  the  rule  of  law,  democracy  and  humanitarianism.   It  is  of  much 

importance  to  understand  the  approach  conducted  by  the  new  government, 

which  will  be  reviewed  and  analyzed  later.  Therefore  it  can  be  concluded that 

the  protest  analysis  provides  an  insight  over  internal  political  shifts:  the 

2015-2017  organised  protests  signal  anti-refugee  and  anti-government 

sentiments  due to failed policies and aggravated situation. What is more, in the 

aftermath  (2017-20)  the  anti-establishment  protests  demonstrate  social  unrest 

over  the  ruling  government  due  to  democratic  concerns,  since  Lega  has 

numerously  been  accused  of  violating  human  rights,  hence  underlying  the 

institutional dimension of unrest, not migratory issue (though being included in 

the former).    

44 

 
 
Figure №7 Public opinion and Refugee Arrivals in Italy (2014-2020) with 

Political Context and Salvini Decrees 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  the  European 

Commission's  Eurobarometer  surveys,  Pew  Research  Center  and  the  United 

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 

By  analysing  the  correlation  between  the  public  threat  perception  and  refugee 

inflows,  the paper may reveal several inferences. First of all, the rising number 

of  refugee  incoming  directly  affects  population’s  concern  over  migration:  the 

peak  years  (2014-2017)  totalling  624.747  migrant  inflow  has  multiplied  the 

percentage of public concern several times, rising from 20% in 2014 to 85% in 

2017,  signalling  population’s  awareness  and  anxiety  about  the  situation.  The 

statistics  confirm  the  hypothesis  of  a  direct  link  between  the  high  inflow  of 

refugees  period  and  the  rise  of  public  concern.  Second,  the  peak  of  public 

concern  did  not  coincide  with  the  year  of  highest incoming levels, the reasons 

for  which  might  be the rising political pre-election competition (and respective 

use  of  anti-immigrant  rhetoric  as  a  tool  for  political  contest  by right-wing and 

populist  parties),  cumulative  effect  of  the  previous  years  and  conflicts  over 

refugee accommodation. Thirdly, though already visible in the previous graphs, 

Table  7  demonstrates  the  direct  effect  of  the  Salvini  Security  Decrees  being 

implemented  in 2018, 2019 respectively. The Decrees, despite being debatable, 

appeared  to  be  an  efficient  way  of  handling  enormous  amounts  of  incoming 

refugees. Nevertheless, the last observation is a relatively high level of concern 

(~50%)  over  the  refugee  issue  despite  the  negligible  number  of  refugees  from 

2018-2020,  which  may  signal  problematic  integration  of  the  refugees  into  the 

society of Italy and the remaining usage of the migration as a threat/tool by the 

right-wing government. 

45 

 
 
Figure  №8  Cumulative  Refugee  Arrivals,  Protection  and  Exits,  Italy 

(2014-2020) 

Source: Compiled by the paper based on the data from the United Nations 

High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Eurostat 

The  following  graph  indicates  a  rising  gap  between  the  arrivals  into  Italy  and 

received  international  protection,  also  depicting  the  increasing  number  of 

refusals  and  deportations  yet  leaving  a  huge  difference  in  two  indicators, 

meaning  an  overwhelming  majority  continued  its  journey  to  the  European 

Union,  using  Italy  as  an  entry  point  or  escaped  it  because  of  the 

refusal/deportation  (further  undocumented  refugees).  Nevertheless,  the number 

of refugees under international protection has been rising until 2020, which may 

come off as an insight for continued public dissent/concern depicted in the Table 

7.  The  paper  may henceforth infer the remaining public concern continued due 

to  relatively  high  numbers  of  refugees  under  international  protection  that 

remained  in  Italy.  What  is  more,  in  the  years  of  2018  and  2019,  the  Salvini 

Decrees made it possible on the graph to indicate that while cumulative arrivals 

slowed  down,  the  number  of  individuals  receiving  international  protection 

remained the same and even declined in 2020, with the refusals and deportations 

46 

 
 
continuing  its  rise.  All  in  all,  it  effectively  decreased  the  pipeline  of  legal 

inclusion.  

2.1.5  Securitization  and  institutionalization  of  Migration:  The  Salvini  Decrees 

and triumph of the League in the EU Parliamentary elections  

It  is  worth  introducing  the  core  of  the  Salvini  Decrees,  to  further 

comprehend  the  prolonged  influence  of  the  refugee  crisis  not  only  on  the 

internal  political  structure  of  Italy  but  also  on  its  policy.  The  fundamental 

changes to the migration policy established by Matteo Salvini and approved by 

the  majority-government  via  collaboration  of  the  Five  Star  Movement  and  the 

Right-wing  coalition  in  both  houses  of  the  Parliament  included  several 

significant  aspects.  The  most  principal  policy  change  was  the  abolition  of 

humanitarian  protection  that  applied  to  people  not  fitting  the  ‘refugee’  set  of 

conditions, yet faced hardship in return. Accounting for about 25 to 30% of total 

approvals  before,  it  was  replaced  by  a  very  narrow  set  of  terms  (e.  g  health 

emergency  or  natural  disasters).  The  second  change  regarded  the  SPRAR 

(Protection  System  for  Asylum  Seekers  and  Refugees)  that  offered  general 

support  like  housing,  learning-language  classes  and  legal  support.  After  the 

reforms,  only  status-granted  refugees  could  access  this  system,  with  asylum 

seekers  being  redistributed  to  the  centralized  reception  centers  with  poor 

conditions.  Another  introduction  was  aimed  at  extending  the  deportation 

grounds  (those  with  conviction  of  crimes,  or  considered  a  threat  to  public 

security)  with  reducing  judicial  discretion  for  refugees  in  allowing  them  to 

object.  The  reforms  also  extended  the  time  for  detention  in  reception  centers 

from  90  to  180  days,  to  have  more  time  for  identification  and  deportation 

logistics.  Lastly,  the  authorities  extended  the  period  of  waiting  for  citizenship 

from  2  to  4  years,  with  an  ability  of  revocation  if  terrorism-related  crimes are 

committed. Generally, all aforementioned introductions made it harder to legally 

accommodate  in  Italy,  and  simplified  bureaucratic  processes  to  deport/refuse 

47 

 
refugees.  The  Salvini  Decrees  officially  institutionalised  securitization  on 

migration.  What  is  more,  on  a  par  with  the  Decrees,  Salvini-led  government 

organised  Port  closures  to  migrant  rescue  ships  (e.g  Open  Arms,  Aquarius), 

facing  criticism  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  UN  and  spreading  the 

tensions. Italy utilized the refusals of taking refugees by the Visegrad Group as 

a  part  of  burden-sharing,  justifying  its  hard  stance  on  migration  and  unilateral 

decisions  that violate the regulations of the EU and human rights. Thereinafter, 

the  paper  may  logically  infer  the  transformation  of  Italian  approach  (from 

humanitarian  and  solidary  to  anti-refugee  and  protectionist)  towards  the 

migration  as  a  part  of internal political transformations (as a part of right-wing 

shift)  chiefly  influenced  by  the  refugee  crisis,  further  leading  to  increased 

controversies  with  the  European  Union  and  United  Nations,  as  a  broader 

consequence of the refugee crisis.  

The  two  elections  to  the  European  Parliament  in  Italy  to  be  analysed, 

were  held  in  the  same  period  of  time:  in  2014  and  2019  respectively.  The 

Northern  League  promised  several  key  changes  apropos  of  the  European 

Parliament:  ending  illegal  migration  by  blocking  of  any  new  NGO  rescuing 

missions,  revive  national  sovereignty  on  border  issues  and  economic  policy, 

stop  relocation  quotas  and end EU interference into the migration policies, and 

reform or ignore the EU budget rules.  

48 

 
Figure  №9  Change  in  Vote  Share  (European  Parliament  Elections  in 

Italy, 2014-19) 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

The  following graph indicates the triumph of the League in the elections to the 

European  Parliament  ,  rising  enormously  from  6.1%  to  38.2%  and  hence 

becoming  the  largest  in  the  Italian  delegation.  The  graph  likewise  shows  a 

strong decline of the democratic party, along with moderate decline of the Five 

Star Movement and steady erosion of the Forza Italia. The paper thus infers that 

the population sentiment coincided with the promises given by the League, with 

respective support provided to the party in the European Parliament.  

2.1.6  Regional  Reorientation,  Migration  Geography  and  Continued  Coalitional 

Split 

The  regional  dynamics  are  crucial  in  understanding  the  dynamics  of 

general  elections  based  on  the  refugee  entry  points  and  main  regions  of 

accommodation.  The paper has briefly explained a huge multi-dimensional gap 

49 

 
 
between  the  North  and  South,  emphasising  it  due  to  further  benefit  for  the 

research.   

Figure  №10  2013  Italian  General  Election:  Voting  Majority  by  Region 

and Zone 

Source:   Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

In  2013  most  of  the  regions  preferred  the  centre-left  coalition  insofar  the 

refugee  issue  was  not  that  vital  at  the  moment,  with  the  peak  economic  crisis 

being already active from 2009-10 (Eurozone Crisis). 

50 

 
 
Figure  №11  2018  Italian  General  Election:  Voting  Majority  by  Region 

and Zone 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Ministry  of  the 

Interior (Ministero dell’Interno) 

Nevertheless the regional dynamics reveal via 2018 General Elections that all of 

the  Northern  regions  of  Italy  favoured  the  Centre-right, with almost taking the 

central  regions  of  the  state. In the South, the Five Star Movement Appeared to 

be  most  popular  among political forces. Now the paper intends to correlate the 

shifts with the most vulnerable to migration regions.  

51 

 
 
Figure №12 Migrant Presence by Region in 2018 (+ change from 2013) 

Source: Compiled by the paper based on the data from Istituto Nazionale 

di Statistica (ISTAT) 

52 

 
 
The  graphs  together  indicate  a  strong  tendency  of  regional  reorientation.  The 

most  affected  regions  by  the  refugees  (e.g  Friuli-Venezia  Giulia,  Marche, 

Umbria,  Emilia-Romagna,  Molise  and  Calabria)  reoriented  towards  the 

right-wing  coalition.  Another  insight  is  that  most  of  the refugees settled in the 

central  administrative  regions  of  Italy,  which  may  be  explained  by  being  a 

humanitarian  centre  for  the  refugees  (i.e  the  main  directorate  of  the  migration 

service,  IOs  like  UNHCR  and  IOM  and  the  largest  reception  and  distribution 

centers).  Some  of  the  Southern  vulnerable  regions  like  Molise  and  Calabria 

came  off  being  overwhelmed  by  the refugees due to standing as an entry point 

and  further  inability  of  the  asylum-seekers  to  move  northwards  (Dublin 

Regulation). It is thus clear that the most-affected regions regardless of the zone 

shifted  its  preferences  towards  the  right-wing  coalition,  with  the  South largely 

relying  on  the  Five  Star  Movement  (only  non-affected  regions)  and  complete 

loss of the electorate by the centre-left alliance. 

It  is vital to bind the migration crisis with the coalitional instability even 

after  the  2018  General  Elections. The coalition government formed in 2018 by 

the  Five  Star  Movement  and  the  Right-wing  alliance,  had  divergent  views  on 

economy  and  governance  but  the  migration  issue  served  as  a  unifying  aspect. 

Both political powers were in favor of stricter management of the issue, yet the 

right  coalition  possessed  way  more  radical  dimensions  of  it  than  a  populist 

M5S, which later on resulted in numerous clashes. One of the debate fields was 

port  policy  (closing  the  ports  to NGO ships) and the questioning of its legality 

by  Foreign  Minister  Moavero  Milanesi  and  further  distancing  of  the  M5S  on 

that  issue.  Another  clash  happened  due  to  Security  (Salvini)  Decrees  that  has 

fueled  instability  within  the  M5S  between  the  left-leaning  and  nationals 

fractions.  The  final  issue  happened  in  2019  when  the M5S called for common 

burden-sharing  in  relocation,  while  Lega  advocated  for  full  closure,  with  the 

former  blaming  the  latter  for  unwillingness  to  cooperate.  The  Lega  initiated  a 

confidence  vote  to  create  a  crisis  hoping  for  a  snap  election.  However,  the 

53 

 
president  of  the  Republic  allocated  time  for  alliance  formation,  and  the  M5S 

reoriented  towards  the  former  rival  Democratic  party.  Together  the  M5S, 

Democratic  party  and  new Italia Viva   accounted for a majority in both houses 

without  a  need  for snap election. Matteo Salvini lost legislative power, and the 

migration  policy  was eased towards a more humanitarian and solidary. Though 

being out of scope of the analysis, it is of much importance to mention that the 

newly established coalition experienced another split, with the Brothers of Italy 

receiving  enormous  amounts  of  support  and  standing  as  a  head  of  the 

Right-wing  coalition,  winning  the  majority  of  seats  in  both  houses.  A  logical 

inference  is  that  the  EU  refugee crisis not only stimulated the internal political 

transformations  meaning  the  evolution  of  electorate’s  preferences,  but  fueled 

instability  within  coalitions,  many  times  leading  to  splits,  crises, redistribution 

of seats in the parliament, and occasionally snap elections. The intra-coalitional 

disagreements  over  policy  implementation  towards  the  management  of  the 

refugee crisis was one of the most important fields of controversies, being vital 

for the state’s stability and security.   

2.1.7 Theory application to the case of Italy 

Morgentau  (1948)  and  Carr  (1939)  as  two  founding  fathers  of  Classical 

Realism,  argue  that  international  politics dynamics is rooted in the struggle for 

power,  being  a  part  of  human  nature.  States’  actions  are  based on the national 

interest  (power),  including domestic and foreign policy formation. States strive 

for  power  not  only  to  survive,  but  also as a demonstration of fear (threat to its 

security),  and  ambition  (power-maximization).  Over  time,  when  the  migration 

issue has become vital on the individual level (not only state one), the respective 

structural  changes  happened,  namely  the  electorate  reorientation towards more 

radical,  nationalistic  political  powers  framing  the  crisis  as  a  threat  to  national 

security  and  cultural  identity.  The  radical  policies  (e.g  Salvini  Decrees,  Port 

closure policies) implied at the state level later on purely reflect state’s framing 

54 

 
the crisis as a threat and radical policies aimed at securitization. In the realm of 

power  politics,  moral  concerns  become  secondary  to  the  state's  survival  and 

security.  Realism  thus  explains  the  state's  actions  as  rational  and  necessary  to 

ensure its security and identity in response to major threats to its survival.  

Constructivist  scholars  like  Wendt  (1992)  and  Finnemore  &  Sikkink 

(1998)  claimed  that  state  behavior  is  moulded  by  norms,  identities  and 

intersubjectivity.  The  state’s  identification  of  threats  heavily  relies  on  its 

perceptions,  meaning  the  image  is  being  shaped  and  influenced  in  a  dynamic 

process.  Constructivist  school  of  thought  might  be  applied  in  the  case  of Italy 

via framing. In the advent of the crisis (2015-16), the public discourse included 

humanitarian  responsibility  and  European  solidarity,  with  the democratic party 

and  Prime  Minister  Renzi often referring to Christian and humanitarian norms, 

creating  an  image  of  Italy  as  a  responsible  gateway.  After  the  reorientation 

towards  the  centre-right  coalition,  the  leader,  Matteo  Salvini,  changed  the 

official  state  narrative  by  framing  the  refugee  crisis  as  a  threat  to  national 

identity  and  security,  presenting  the  migrants  as  criminals  and  therefore 

constructing a new perception. The narrative of Italy being left alone by the EU 

has  dominated  the  state,  with  the  image  of  Italy  as  a  victim  of  the  EU. 

Constructivism  therefore  provides  comprehensive  insight by demonstrating the 

discursive  shift  from  humanitarian  approach  to securitization due to constantly 

evolving state perceptions.  

With regard to Securitization theory, scholars like Buzan, Wæver , and de 

Wilde  (1998) together laid the groundwork by emphasizing non-inferent nature 

of security threats. They stated that it should be a successful framing strategy of 

existential  threat  for  the  problem  to  transform  into  a  national  security  threat 

which requires extraordinary attention and measures to be implemented.   In the 

case  of  Italy,  it  is  clear  that  during  the  domination  of  the  alliance between the 

Five Star Movement and the Centre-right coalition, the migration has become a 

central pillar in political discourse and underwent serious securitization. Former 

55 

 
Minister  of  the  Interior  Matteo  Salvini,  for  instance,  framed  the  migrants  as 

invaders and NGO ships as complicit to illegal human trafficking. The Security 

Decrees  that  have  been  implemented  bypassing  the  ordinary  (prolonged)  legal 

procedures  demonstrated  the  state  of  emergency.  The  Decrees  have  become 

popular  among  the  population  that  indicated  the  support  and  shift  of  the 

migration  issue from humanitarian to national survival. Securitization theory in 

general explains the policy shift despite the relatively similar number of refugee 

arrivals  from  2014  to  2017,  providing  an  insight  on  how  the  framing  of 

existential  threat  shapes  opinions,  later  on  making  it possible to take measures 

previously surreal due to placing it into the security realm.  

The Migration Systems Theory, headed by Mabogunje (1970), Massey et 

al.  (1993),  and  de  Haas  (2010) describes the motives of migration, underlining 

complex  transnational  interdependencies  -  geographic,  colonial,  economic  and 

social. The theory also claims that the migration flows are embedded into wider 

systems  and  path  dependencies.  Its  application  to  Italy  reveals  its  role  as  a 

transit  country  due  to  geographical  proximity  as  a  major  factor,  and  historical 

ties  and  informal  economy  as  secondary  ones.  Despite  restrictive  policies  the 

migration  flows  continued  due 

to  adaptation  of  smuggling  networks, 

particularly  infrastructure.  What  is  more,  the  circular  logic  of  coercion  and 

irregularity  (meaning  the  more  enforcement  the  more  irregularity)  within  the 

framework  of  the  Migration  Systems  Theory  is  a  classical  outcome.  The 

Migration  Systems Theory consequently helps in comprehending the migration 

flows  and  evolving  smuggling  networks  regardless  of  the  Italian  approach 

insofar its embeddedness into a broader frameworks.   

2.1.8 Politics: Conclusion 

Therefore,  the  paper  intends  to  conclude  the  influence  of  the  EU 

migration  crisis  on  the  political  sphere  of  Italy.  The  political  sphere  has 

undergone  numerous  changes  due  to  the  refugee  crisis.  The  first  one  is  the 

56 

 
realignment  of  the  electorate.  Democratic  government’s  policies  have  failed 

sharply  due  to  the  pursuit  of  humanitarian  foundations  and  moral  duties. 

Constantly  turbulent  coalitional  structure  many  times  resulted  in its instability, 

on  a  par  with  the  electorate's  failed  expectations.  All  these  factors  pushed  the 

population  to  prefer  an  alternative,  more  conservative,  nationalist  right-wing 

coalition, which has been positioning the refugee crisis from its beginning as an 

existential  problem  to  Italian  security  and  identity.  The  right-wing  coalition 

managed to get a majority in the Parliament by aligning with the populist M5S. 

The  formerly  ruling  Democratic  Party  lost  over  60%  of  its  seat  share  in  the 

Senate,  and  over  30%  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  the  2018  General 

Elections,  with  the  League  rising  excessively  from  a  small-medium  regional 

party  to  a  leader of the right-wing coalition. The Five Star Movement received 

support due to its anti-establishment and populist slogans, being popular among 

the  disillusioned  voters.  The  second  inference  is  that  the  refugee  crisis 

destabilized  the  government  coalitions  and  deepened  political  fragmentation. 

Traditionally  consisting  of  two  coalitions,  the  Italian  political  sphere  included 

divergent political forces joining the coalitions to have a say. The refugee crisis 

bared ideological differences insofar the parties possessed divergent viewpoints 

on  the  management  of  the  crisis,  that  has  regularly  been  resulting  in  the 

government  collapses,  withdrawal  of  support  and  political  alienations.  The 

demonstrative  examples  are:  the  collapse  of  the  Letta  government  (2014), 

resignation of Renzi (2016) and fall of the M5S-Lega coalition (2019). The third 

outcome of the EU refugee crisis is the increasing public concern over refugees 

and  security  correlating  with  the  inflow  numbers  and  numerous  political 

protests  during  the  peak  years:  the  public  reacted  to  the  issue  negatively, 

expressing its anxiety and organising the protests to influence the situation (see 

Tables  6  and  7).  Another  insight  is  that  with  the  change  of  the  Italy’s  internal 

political  composition,  the  approach  and  official  state  framing  of  the  issue 

evolved  as  a  broader  consequence:  with  the  rise  of  the  centre-right,  the  state 

57 

 
implemented hard stance on migration (e.g Security Decrees, Port closures) and 

officially framed migration as a threat to national security. It is also important to 

note  that  most  vulnerable  regions  in  number  of  arriving  refugees  (Calabria, 

Friuli-Venezia  Giulia,  Marche,  Umbria,  etc.)  shifted  its  voter  preferences 

towards  the  centre-right  coalition:  the  electorate  followed  the  radical promises 

provided  by  the  centre-right  alliance,  alienating  from  the  leftists  and  largely 

ignoring  the  M5S.  Another  consequence  of  the refugee crisis is the triumph of 

the  League  in  the  2019  European  Parliament  elections: the electorate similarly 

preferred  the  radical  approach  (e.g  blocking  NGO  boats,  reviving  national 

sovereignty  and  stopping  relocation  quotas)  of  the  centre-right  alliance  over 

moderate promises of the M5S and preservation of the humanism by the leftists. 

Similarly,  the  refugee  crisis  has  affected  the  transformation  of  the  public 

discourse  and  identity:  the  discourse  shifted  from  the  humanitarian  narrative 

(Italy  as  a  gateway  to  the  EU)  towards  identity  protection,  fear  and  exclusion 

(Italy left alone), with the elites presenting it as an existential threat to the state 

security,  prioritizing  the  security  over  moral  obligations.  Lastly,  the  refugee 

crisis stimulated the institutionalization of the migration securitization:  

Constant  gridlocks  and  failed  Constitutional  reform  indicated  the  increased 

legislative  attention  to  the  issue,  with  governmental  branches  of  power 

constantly  involved  in  disagreements  over  policy  making,  and Salvini Decrees 

officially  politicizing  the  migration  issue  by  embedding  it  in  legislative  and 

executive action, beyond traditionally established humanitarian frameworks.   

Economic sphere 

2.2.1 Refugee expenditures: shifts in budget allocation  

When it comes to examination of economic indicators when assessing the 

influence  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis  on  the  state  of  Italy,  it  should  be  clear  that 

58 

 
 
there  exist  numerous  conditionalities  that  determine  the  impact.  Insofar Italian 

economy  has  long  been  vulnerable,  undergoing  serious  stagnations  and 

recessions, especially demonstrated by the Eurozone crisis, the paper intends to 

be  accurate  when  making  conclusions  on  the  economic  dimensions  of  the 

refugee  crisis,  paying  much  attention  to  the  complexity  of  economic  and 

financial  processes  within  a  country.  The  paper suggests to begin by analysing 

the  budget  allocation  shifts  from  2014  to  2020,  correlating  it  with  the  refugee 

arrivals.  

Figure  №13  Italy  Refugee  Expenditures  and  EU  Co-Financing  with  Refugee 

Arrivals, 2014-20. 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  the  Italian 

Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  (MEF),  Ministry  of  the  Interior  (Ministero 

dell’Interno), and the European Commission Directorate-General for Migration 

and Home Affairs 

The  chart  demonstrates  Italy’s  national  budget  refugee  costs,  together  with 

financial  assistance  by  the  European  Union:  the  Asylum,  Migration  and 

Integration  Fund  (AMIF)  and  Internal Security Fund (ISF). The graph shows a 

59 

 
 
strong tendency of rising refugee costs, which grew more than two times in the 

peak  years  (from  1.5  billion  to  more  than  4  billion  in  2017  peak),  deriving  a 

clear  conclusion  that  during  2015-17,  when most of the refugees flooded Italy, 

the  costs  of  rescue, distribution and accommodation rose dramatically. The EU 

assistance, though being present and stable, appeared to be a minor bonus to the 

actual  costs  for  Italy,  indicating  the  disbalance  between  the  national  and 

supranational  efforts  in  combating  the  crisis.  What  is  more,  during  2018-20, 

with  way  less numbers of incoming refugees, the costs did not fall sharply, but 

slightly  decreased  and  remained  on  relatively  high  level  (4.2  billion  in  2018 

compared  to  1.5  billion  in  2014)  due  to  persisting  costs  of  integration, 

bureaucracy and providing of necessities. Nevertheless, closer to 2020 the costs 

start to decline in a bigger proportion, reflecting hard policies of the Salvini (e.g 

Salvini  Decrees,  Port  policies).  Altogether,  the  graph  provides  an  insight  by 

outlining  the  correlation  between  the  rising  numbers of refugees and increased 

costs (financial burden) in Italy depicted in shifts of national budget allocations, 

with  little  EU assistance and comparatively persisting high expenditures due to 

remaining bureaucratic, accommodation and integration costs.   

2.2.2 Labor market and GDP 

One of the fundamental economic indicators reflecting the situation in the 

economy is the unemployment rate, which has long been high in Italy due to the 

number  of  crises  and  stemming  economic  problems.  It  is  hence  essential  to 

examine  the  correlation  between  the  number  of  incoming  refugees  and 

unemployment  rate,  to  assess  the  influence  on  the  labor  market,  though 

suggesting  limited  influence  due  to  complexity  of  the  indicator. It is crucial to 

remember  that  during  the  rule  of  the  left  coalition,  the  Democratic  Party 

encouraged  integration  of  the  refugees  by  a  wide  set  of instruments, including 

promotion of the refugee employment by the local agencies and businesses. The 

paper  also  acknowledges  that  such  an  indicator  as  unemployment  rate  is 

60 

 
complex  in  its  structure  and  depends  on  a  multi-dimensional  set  of  economic 

conditionalities, therefore the derived conclusions may come off approximate.  

Figure  №14  Unemployment  Rate,  Refugee  Arrivals  and  Protection  in 

Italy (2014-2020) 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data from the World Bank, 

Eurostat and UNHCR 

The  following  graph  demonstrates  a  gradual  decline  in  unemployment  rate, 

being  more  than  12.5%  in  2014,  and  less  than  9.5%  in  2020.  Also,  while  the 

tendency of refugee inflow decreased sharply from 2017 to 2020, the number of 

people  receiving  international  protection  continued to rise. The most important 

inference is that there is no correlation between the rising number of refugees in 

Italy  and  rise  in  unemployment,  insofar the latter has been falling consistently.  

The drop in unemployment is due to non-migration factors, which now intersect 

with  the  analysis  and  hence  make  it  impossible  to  derive  direct  conclusions, 

except  for  no  influence  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis  on  the  labor  market  of  Italy. 

There  is  a  wide  set  of  the  reasons  for  drop  in  unemployment  during  2014-20, 

which  the  paper  intends  to  shortly  outline  for  a  comprehensive  view  of  the 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
object  under  study.  The first one is the post-crisis economic recovery: after the 

Eurozone  crisis,  the  economy  started  to  recover  from  a  massive  crisis  due  to 

exports,  tourism  and  manufacturing,  with  the  GDP  growth  being  slow  but 

positive  (from  0.8%  to  1.7%)  which  reflected  in  the  employment  dynamics 

(European Commission, 2020). The second factor was a Labor Market Reforms 

introduced  by  Renzi’s  government:  ‘Jobs  Act’  of  2015  introduced  easier 

mechanisms  for  firing  and  hiring,  stimulated  incentives  for  open-ended 

contracts  and  erased  duality  between  temporary  and  permanent  contracts 

(Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation and Development, 2019). Some other 

factors  like  demographic  dynamics,  growth  of  informal  and  precarious  work 

likewise contributed to the fall of unemployment rate (ISTAT, 2023). Therefore, 

with  regard  to  the  graph  the paper may infer that the EU refugee crisis did not 

display any influence on the unemployment rate.  

Figure  №15  GDP  Growth  in  High  vs.  Low  Migration  Regions  in  Italy 

(2014-2020) 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  ISTAT, 

Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  and  European 

Commission 

62 

 
 
Regions  with  high  migration  are  Marche,  Calabria,  Emilia-Romagna,  Molise 

and  Umbria,  while  low-migration  ones  are  Lazio,  Abruzzo,  Toscana  and 

Lombardy respectively. The paper likewise put the periods that might affect the 

GDP to complement the full picture, and especially elaborate on the GDP fall in 

2020  due  to  Covid-19.  The  cumulative  of  the  high  migration  regions  and  low 

migration  regions  almost  coincide  with  each  other,  which  is  explained  by 

different zones: high migration regions represent all parts of Italy, with Calabria 

and  Molise  being  in  the  South,  Umbria  and  Marcha  in  the  center  and 

Emilia-Romagna in the North. In the low migration regions all are located in the 

Center except for Lombardy that is in the North. Therefore, a huge gap between 

underdeveloped  South  and  leading  North,  with  Centre  slightly  yielding  to  the 

North,  removes  divergence  in  indicators,  insofar  the  groups represent different 

zones  of  Italy.  Both  groups  performed  moderate  increases  in  GDP  throughout 

the period except for the 2020 Covid-19 shock, showing no distinctions due to: 

refugees  being  located  in  different  zones  of  Italy,  the  zones  being  different  in 

terms  of  economic  development  (poor  South, rich North and moderate Centre) 

which  in  total  provides  no  insight.  The  paper  hence  may  conclude  that  an 

analysis  of  the  GDP dynamics in high-refugee and low-refugee regions reveals 

no  insights  of  any  influence  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis  on  actual  GDP 

performance of the regions.  

2.2.3 Inflation and Housing Prices 

Fundamental  indicators  like  inflation  and  housing  prices  index  are 

non-excludable  while  analysing  economic  dynamics.  The  paper  suggests 

expertise in the housing prices index in the low and high migration areas.  

63 

 
Figure №16 Housing Price Growth by Region in Italy (2014-2020) 

Source: Compiled by the paper based on the data from ISTAT 

The  graph  includes  major  high  and  low refugee areas in Italy, with cumulative 

rise  of  the  housing  prices  from  2014  to  2020.  The  paper  derives  a  conclusion 

that there is no correlation between the overwhelming numbers of refugees and 

increases in housing prices, since in the top five, only one high-migration region 

is  listed.  The  absence  of  linkage  may  be  due  to  refugee’s  inability  to  rent  an 

apartment, since an absolute majority of the people in need of protection had no 

financial resources to afford a good standard of living.  

Lastly,  the  paper  plans  to  compare  levels  of  inflation  in  high  and  low 

migration regions.  

64 

 
 
 
 
Figure  №17  Average  Annual  Inflation  Rate  By  Region  In  Italy 

(2014–2020) 

Source: Compiled by the paper based on the data from ISTAT 

The  chart  shows  most  and  least  affected  by  migration  regions, with respective 

average  inflation  rates  in  each  for  the  years  2014-2020.  The  least  affected 

regions  occupy  3  out  of  5  places  in  the  least  with  the  highest  inflation.  The 

paper  henceforth  may  derive  an  inference  that  there  is  no  link  between  the 

refugee  inflow  and  rising  inflation  in  the  regions,  which  complements  the 

overall picture of the absence of negative effect of the EU refugee crisis on the 

Italian economy.  

2.2.4 Economy: Conclusion 

With regard to all analysed material, the paper is ready to deliver several 

key inferences on the influence of the EU refugee crisis on the economic sphere 

of  Italy.  First  of  all,  the  refugee  crisis  has  affected  Italy’s  annual  budget 

allocation,  pushing  the  state  to assign greater proportion of the national budget 

towards the refugee issue: totalling 1.5 billion euros  in 2014, it has dramatically 

increased  throughout  the  time, seeing its peak in 2017 (slightly above 4 billion 

euros)  coinciding  with  the  peak  of  the  refugee  crisis  years  (2015-17).  Italy, 

65 

 
 
 
 
receiving little support from the EU budget on migration, deepened its financial 

burden  by  allocating resources on migration over investing them. By exploring 

labor  market  dynamics,  namely  correlating  the  unemployment  rate  with  the 

numbers  of  arriving  refugees  and  people  who  officially  received  status  of 

international  protection,  the  paper  may  reveal  that  the  indicators  lack 

interrelation  and  the  EU  refugee  crisis  did  not  affect  the  unemployment  rate. 

Another observation was conducted via comparison of the regional GDPs of the 

most  and  least  affected  regions  by  the  migration,  to  see  if  overloaded  regions 

performed better or worse. The cumulative results showed that migration flows 

did  not  affect  the  indicator,  and  hence  no  correlation  was  proved.  Then,  the 

paper  focused  on  analysing  the  housing  prices  index  in  the  most  and  least 

affected  regions,  where  it  concluded  that  the  number  of  refugees  in the region 

does  not  affect  the  housing  prices  dynamics,  at  least  directly.  Lastly,  the 

inflation  index  was  selected  on  a  regional  dimension  to  see  if  most  affected 

regions  differed  from  the  least  affected  ones  in  terms  of  inflation.  The 

conclusion  is  that  no  correlation  is  found  between  the  variables,  meaning  the 

inflation does not depend on the numbers of refugees in the region. Overall, the 

economic sphere of Italy did not undergo any serious shifts in its nature, insofar 

the economic side is less prone to visible direct changes than political one when 

it  comes  to  the  refugee  issue,  which  was  institutionalized  and  politicized  over 

time.  Economic  complexity  largely  consists  of  pure  economic phenomena that 

may  have  a  dramatic  influence  over  state’s  economic  indicators,  and  with 

migration as a politicized phenomenon, the influence is small or even invisible. 

However, it is worth mentioning that one economic change was a serious rise in 

federal  budget  costs  to  the  refugee  issue,  which  is  a  direct  effect  of  the  EU 

refugee  crisis,  stemming  Italy’s  unilateral  attempts  to  manage  the  inflow  by 

itself.  

66 

 
 
 
Social sphere 

2.3.1 Crime rate and incarceration 

When assessing the effect of the EU refugee crisis on the social sphere of 

Italy,  one  of  the  most  fundamental  indexes  to  include  is  the  crime  rate.  The 

paper  suggests  timeline  analysis  of  crime  rate  dynamics  being  applied  to  the 

numbers  of  the  refugee  crisis  for  the  period  of  2014-20.  The  paper  also  states 

that there is no credible information on regional dynamics of the crime rates for 

selected  periods, which makes it impossible to examine regional dimensions of 

such 

an 

index. 

Figure №18. Italy: Crime Rate vs. Net Migration (2014-2020) 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  UNHCR  and 

Macrotrends 
The following graph demonstrates timeline comparison of net migration inflows 

and  general  crime  rate  dynamics  in  Italy.  It  also  applies  the  periods of Salvini 

Decrees  introduction  and  start  of  the  refugee  crisis,  to  complement the overall 

picture. The paper may infer based on the chart that the crime rate, regardless of 

the numbers of incoming refugees, has been steadily decreasing and henceforth 

showed  no  interrelation  with  the  EU  refugee  crisis.  The  advent  of  the  crisis 

67 

 
 
 
 
(2014-17)  with  the  highest  numbers  of  refugees  did  not  increase  the  levels  of 

crime,  moreover  it  even  decreased  significantly  from  0.78  in  2014  to  0.63  in 

2017. Another observation is that applied periods of time (e.g start of the crisis 

and  Salvini  Decrees)  cannot  be  recognized  as  those  affecting  the  crime  index, 

insofar  its  tendency  over  the  whole  period  demonstrated  gradual  decline. 

Therefore  it  is  apparent  that  the  EU  refugee  crisis  did  not  affect  the  level  of 

crime  rate  in  Italy,  though  being  a  part  of  right-wing  parties’  treatment  and 

framing  of  the  refugee  crisis:  the  politicians  oftentimes  referred  to  individual 

cases of refugee violence, presenting them as those who disrupt Italy’s security. 

Nevertheless,  there  exist  documented  cases  of  refugee  violence,  but  that  does 

not  reverse  the  trend  of  the  crime  rate,  making  it  invisible,  and  hence  not 

affecting.  

Another  index  to  go  through  examination  is  incarceration,  or  prison 

population  by  nationality.  The  comparison  between  the  refugee  inflows  and 

dynamics  of  the  imprisoned  population  are  vital  in  understanding  the  social 

effect of the refugees, when it comes to social security issues. The paper intends 

to widen the timeline starting from 2010 and till the 2020, insofar it is important 

to  comprehend  the  lasting  effect  (starting  from  earlier  years)  of  the  refugee 

accommodation, and the absence of immediate imprisonment shifts. 

68 

 
 
 
Figure  №19  Foreign  Nationals  in  Italian  Prisons  vs.  Refugee  Arrivals 

(2010-2020) 

Source: Compiled by the paper based on the data from ISTAT 

The following table demonstrates shifts in the percentage of foreign nationals in 

Italian  prisons,  compared  to  the  refugee  arrivals  over the years 2010-2020. By 

analyzing both trends, the paper may conclude that starting from 2014, when the 

number  of  incoming   refugees  increased  dramatically,  the  foreign  prisoners 

index  started  to  rise  as  well,  with  the  local  peaks  matching  in  2017,  and 

afterwards both declining proportionally. However, there is an insight of an even 

greater  proportion  of  foreign  prisoners  before  the  refugee  crisis,  which refutes 

the  logic  of  correlation  between  two  indexes.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that 

the  proportions  of  indexes  differ  significantly,  e.g  more  than 200% increase in 

refugee  arrivals  from  2013  to  2014  and  foreign  prisoner’s  index  remaining 

stable  in  the  prolonged  period  of  2014-17,  later  on  even  declining  given  the 

remaining  refugees.  Henceforth,  the  paper  may  infer  that  though  having  some 

local  coincidences,  the  two  trends  do  not  have  direct  interrelation.  The  EU 

refugee  crisis  thus  cannot  be  attributed  to  shifts  in  proportions  of  foreign 

prisoners.   

2.3.2 Security Threats and Terrorism  

The  Security  threats  index  shows  the  level  of  threats  within  the  state, 

including 

bombings, 

attacks, 

rebel  movements,  mutinies, 

coups, 

organised/political violence and terrorism. It is important to distinguish between 

the  indexes,  insofar  security  index  provides  a  general  picture  of a wider set of 

state  threats,  and  terrorism  as  one  of  the  elements  but  not  the  only  one.  The 

terrorism index will guide precise numbers and hence provide valuable insights 

on dynamics. By analyzing both trends, the results will complement each other, 

forming a comprehensive view.  

69 

 
   
 
Figure  №20  Security  Threats  Index  and  People  Under  International 

Protection, Italy(2014-2020) 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  The  Global 

Economy  

The graph indicates the Security Threats Index in Italy for a period from 2014 to 

2020,  on  a  par  with  refugees  holding  international  protection  in  Italy  for  the 

same  period  of  time.  One  inference  is  that  with  the  advent  of  the  crisis   and 

during  its  peak  the  Security  Threats  indicator reversed its direction and started 

to  rise  gradually.  With  more  people  receiving  international  protection,  the 

Security  Threats  has  been  increasing  proportionally,  rising  by  more  than  25% 

during  2015-19,  signalling  correlation  between  the  two  variables.  The  number 

of  people  under  international  protection  decreased  sharply  by  2020,  due  to 

COVID-19  restrictions,  harsh  migration  policy  and  decreasing  NGO  rescue 

activity  (Salvini  Decrees),  yet  the  Security  Threat  indicator  continued  to  rise 

probably  due  to  the  prolonged  effect  of  refugee  accommodation  in  Italy. 

Therefore the paper may come to the conclusion that gradual increase in people 

holding  international  protection  in  Italy  correlates  with  steady  increase  in 

70 

 
 
 
Security Threats index, making it logical to infer the former variable influencing 

the latter.  

Lastly,  the  Terrorism  index  should  be  studied  and  applied  to  the  exact 

indicator  of  people  under  international  protection,  to  see  the  dynamics  and 

ensure the credibility of derived conclusions.  

Figure №21 Terrorism Index and People Under International Protection, 

Italy(2014-2020) 

Source:  Compiled  by  the  paper  based  on  the  data  from  Trading 

Economics 

The  following  graph  includes  Terrorism  index  in Italy for 2014-20, along with 

the  dynamics  of  the  people  under  international  protection.  Terrorism  index 

shows  gradual  increase  over  the  whole  period of time, slightly falling in 2020, 

probably due to restrictions of movement of people or decreased number of the 

refugees under international protection. The graph confirms correlation between 

the  two  variables  that  both  have  been  increasing  from  2014  to  2019,  and  the 

actual  rise  of  Terrorism  index  starting  from  2015  with  the  advent  of  the  EU 

refugee  crisis.  Thus  the  paper  may  conclude  that  the  rising numbers of people 

71 

 
 
 
holding international protection correlates with the increase in Terorrism index, 

which  confirms  the  inference  on correlation between the Security Threat index 

and numbers of people under protection in Italy.  

2.3.3 Social sphere: Conclusion 

The  paper  is  ready  to  deliver  several  key  inferences  on  the  influence  of 

the  EU  refugee  crisis  on  the  social  dynamics  of  Italy.  First  of all, the research 

concluded  that  the  refugee  crisis  did  not  possess  any  direct  influence  on  the 

crime  rate  within  Italy,  with  the  graph  demonstrating  fluctuating  unbound 

tendencies.  With  regard  to  analysis  of  incarceration  of  foreign  nationals 

compared  to  the  number  of  arriving  refugees,  the paper concluded that despite 

having  local  coincidences  on  the  graph,  there  is  no  clear link between the two 

indicators, especially noting the difference in proportions, e.g the tremendously 

rising  number  of  refugee  arrivals  and fall of the foreign prisoners’ share in the 

same period of time. However, the paper found correlation between the Security 

Threats  Index  and  the  people  under  international  protection  in  Italy,  later  on 

linking it to the Terrorism index to create a comprehensive view of the situation 

and  ensure  the  credibility  of  the  inferences.  The  rise  in  the numbers of people 

under international protection proportionally increased both Security Threat and 

Terorrism indexes. Thus the paper comes to the conclusion that the EU refugee 

crisis  had  a  moderate  effect  on  the  social  development  of  Italy,  influencing 

several indicators but not all of them.  

Conclusion 

The  paper is now equipped to list key findings of the research that it has 

derived  via  complex  analysis  of  the  political  and  socio-economic  spheres  of 

Italy,  with  an  application  of  the  EU  refugee  crisis.  To  begin  with,  Italy’s 

handling  of  the  crisis  heavily  depended  on  several  pre-conditionalities  that 

formed  the  position,  in  which  Italy  came  across  the  EU  refugee  crisis,  and 

72 

 
 
defined its structural limitations: ineffective governance due to political balance 

of power within a state (constantly hung parliament, Letta government collapse, 

Renzi  resignation after failed Constitutional Reform), obligations under the EU 

law  (Dublin  Regulation  required  accommodation  and  maintenance  in  the  first 

state  of  entry),  limited/inconvenient  EU  assistance  (minor  financial  support  to 

Italy  as  an  ‘entry  to  the  EU’,  failed  relocation  scheme),  lack  of  national 

economic  and  humanitarian  resources  to  handle  the crisis (overall Italy’s weak 

economy,  even  more  vulnerable  after  the  Eurozone  crisis),  geographical 

proximity  (making  the  Central  Mediterranean  one  of  the  most  popular  routes 

even  before  the  EU  refugee  crisis  with  North  African  Emergency,  and  after 

Libyan  civil  wars  most  usable  because  of  developed  smuggling  networks). 

Aforementioned  conditionalities  defined  the  range  of  Italian  abilities  to  take 

action  in  the  advent  of  the  refugee  crisis.  The  political  sphere  has  undergone 

substantial  shifts  due  to  the  EU  refugee  crisis.  First,  it  is  worth  mentioning 

reorientation  of  the  electorate  due  to  unmet  expectations  of  the  centre-left 

coalition  governance,  its  humanitarian  policies  and  coalitional  instability. 

Inconvenience  of  the  traditional  ruling  party  has  led  to  realignment  of  the 

population.  The  right-wing  alliance,  with  way  more  radical  views  (politics  of 

exclusion,  criminalization  of  migrants),  framed  the  migration  issue  as  an 

existential  threat  to  the  security  and  identity  of  Italy.  Consequently,  the 

right-wing coalition received greater support in the 2018 General Elections and 

became  the  largest  coalition  in  Italy.  By  aligning  with  the  anti-establishment 

Five  Star  Movement,  the  political  forces  together  formed  a  majority  in  both 

houses  of  the  parliament,  thus  indicating  a  complete  change  in  the  internal 

political  conjuncture  of  Italy.  The  League  (former  Northern  League)  has 

experienced  an  excessive  rise  in  popularity,  becoming  the  new  leader  of  the 

right-wing coalition, with its leader, Matteo Salvini becoming a Prime Minister, 

signalling the change of the Italian approach towards more radical, nationalistic 

and conservative. The Democratic Party lost over 60% of its seats’ share in the 

73 

 
Senate, and more than 30% in the Chamber of Deputies, revealing the fall of its 

traditional  rule  and  centre-left  coalition.  The  Five  Star  Movement  became  a 

third  significant  force  in  Italian  politics,  attracting  the  support  from  the 

disillusioned  voters,  popularizing  the  anti-establishment,  populist  slogans.  The 

change  in  Italian internal political structure has logically led to radical shifts in 

its  policy  as  a  part  of  the  right-wing  alliance’s  agenda.  Italy  tightened  asylum 

application  rules,  complicated  bureaucratic  procedures  for  citizenship,  eased 

legal  procedures of deportations, closed its ports to NGO rescue ships, reduced 

judicial discretion abilities, abolished access to SPRAR system for undistributed 

refugees,  extended  the  time  for  location  in  reception  centers  with  poor 

conditions.  Therefore  another  prolonged  outcome  of  the  refugee  crisis  was 

transformation  of  the  Italian  approach  from  humanitarian  to  anti-refugee  and 

protectionist.  Another  key  finding  is  increased  public  concern  expressed  by 

correlation with the numbers of incoming refugees: during 2015-17 peak years, 

the percentage of Italian respondents perceiving migration as a major issue rose 

significantly  to 85% in 2017. The EU refugee crisis similarly caused numerous 

anti-refugee  protests  during  the  peak  years  (and  democratic  governance), 

validating  the  inferences  on  public  concern  over  the  issue  as  a  consequence. 

What  is  more,  the  research  found  that  most  affected  by  the  migration  regions 

(Calabria,  Friuli-Venezia  Giulia,  Marche,  Umbria, etc.) all followed right-wing 

coalition’s radical principles in the 2018 General Elections, which indicates the 

causation  between  the  two  variables:  the  more refugees entered the region, the 

higher the chance of reorientation towards right-wing policies. Another outcome 

of the EU refugee crisis is a victory of the Lega in the 2019 elections to the EU 

Parliament:  by  promising  stopping  relocation  quotas  and  reviving  national 

sovereignty over migration and economy, the coalition received strong support, 

and hence started to represent Italian national interests on the EU supranational 

level. Likewise, the crisis has affected the transformation of the public discourse 

and  identity:  the discourse shifted from the humanitarian (Italy as a gateway to 

74 

 
the  EU)  to protectionist, fear-driven and exclusionist (Italy left alone), with the 

ruling  elites  framing  the  issue  as  an  existential  threat  to  security.  Last  but  not 

least, 

the  EU 

refugee  crisis 

resulted 

in 

the  official  politicization, 

institutionalization and securitization of migration as an issue: going far beyond 

traditional  humanitarian  networks,  the  issue  attracted  much  of  the  legislative 

attention  (gridlocks,  failed  Constitutional  reform)  and  stimulated  political 

fragmentation over the issue, with the Salvini Decrees deploying legislative and 

executive  action,  officially  politicizing  the  migration.  With  regard  to  the 

economic  side,  the  paper  may  conclude  that  the  EU  refugee  crisis  influenced 

Italy’s  budget  by  pushing  the  state  to allocate more resources on the migration 

issue: In the peak years Italy has been spending more than 4 billion euros on the 

migration  issue,  compared  to  1.5  billion  euros  in  2014,  deteriorating  financial 

burden  within  Italy’s  vulnerable  economy.  The refugee crisis did not affect the 

unemployment  rate,  as  analysis  proved  lack  of correlation between the studied 

variables.  The  regional  GDP  dynamics  selected  by  most  and  least  affected  by 

the  migration  regions  likewise  demonstrated  no  direct  influence  of  the  crisis. 

Lastly,  while  analysing  the  housing  prices  by regions (most and least affected) 

and  overall  inflation  index  in  Italy,  the  paper  established  no  link  between  the 

numbers of incoming refugees and indexes. Therefore, stressing the complexity 

of economic processes, the paper concluded no direct visualisation of the crisis' 

influence on Italy’s economic development, except for a clear dramatic increase 

in  migration  expenses’  share  in Italy’s national budget as a consequence of the 

refugee crisis and Italy’s unilateral attempts to handle the issue. Apropos of the 

social sphere, the paper has come to several conclusions. There is no correlation 

between  the  rising  numbers  of  refugees  and  crime  rate  in  Italy,  with  the 

variables  having  completely  individual  dynamics.  In  the  analysis  of  the 

incarceration,  the  research  inferred  lack  of  proof  in  actual  interconnection: 

despite  having  some  local  coincidences,  the  general  picture  appeared  to  be 

differing,  especially  in  proportional  comparison,  e.g  the  refugee  numbers 

75 

 
increased  significantly  in  2016-17,  but  the  share  of  foreign  nationals  even 

declined. Nevertheless, the Security threat and Terrorism performed analogously 

when  being  applied  to  the  index  of  people  under  international  protection.  The 

Security  Threat  index,  being  a  comprehensive  indicator,  coincided  with  the 

dynamics  of  people  under  the  international  protection  index,  demonstrating  a 

correlation  between  the  two  variables.  The  Terrorism  index,  as  a  more precise 

indicator,  confirmed  the  paper's  assertions  by  similarly  correlating  with  the 

index  of  people  under  international  protection  in  Italy.  Thus  the  research  may 

conclude  that  the  EU  refugee  crisis  has  made  a  moderate  effect  on  the  social 

sphere  of  Italy.  It  did  not  affect  crime  rate  and  incarceration,  but  visibly 

correlated with the security threat and terrorism indexes’ rise.   

The  hypothesis  of  the  research  has  partially  been  proven.  The  political 

shifts  listed  in  the  general  conclusion  vindicate  the  paper's  hypothesis: the EU 

refugee  crisis  indeed  triggered  internal  political  shift  towards  right-wing 

coalition,  increased  public  anxiety  over  the issue and provoked organisation of 

anti-refugee  political  protests  in  the  peak  years.  The  economic  side  of  the 

research  was  partly  proven,  insofar  the  analysis  of  the  unemployment  and 

regional  GDPs  indicated  no  influence  of  the  refugee  crisis  on  the  dynamics, 

though  increased  public  and  security  spending  reaffirmed  the  causation.  The 

social  dimension  of  the  hypothesis  was  similarly  partly  proven,  since  the 

tendency of correlation between the refugee dynamics and crime rate, as well as 

incarceration  rate,  was  not  confirmed.  However,  the  Security  Threat  and 

Terrorism  indexes  performed  similarly  to  the  people  under  the  international 

protection  index  (legal  refugees),  therefore  confirming  the  partial  influence  of 

the crisis on the social sphere.  

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  

Ambrosetti, E., & Paparusso, A. (2019). Migrants or Refugees? The Evolving Governance 

of Migration Flows in Italy during the “Refugee Crisis”. Retrieved from 

https://shs.cairn.info/revue-europeenne-des-migrations-internationales-2018-1-page-15

1?lang=fr&tab=resume  

Ambrosini, M. (2017). Why irregular migrants are more vulnerable to exploitation: The 

role of institutional frameworks. International Migration, 55(6), 68–79. 

https://library.oapen.org/bitstream/id/b55eb04b-5daf-4547-9db0-cffbfaa35e1b/978-3-03

1-30838-3.pdf  

Amnesty International. (n.d.). Italy: Human rights in the Republic of Italy. Retrieved from 

https://www.amnesty.org/en/location/europe-and-central-asia/western-central-and-south

-eastern-europe/italy/report-italy/ 

Buzan, B., Wæver, O., & de Wilde, J. (1998). Security: A new framework for analysis. 

Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers. Retrieved from 

https://www.academia.edu/39047709/Buzan_Waever_and_De_Wilde_1998_Security_

A_New_Framework_For_Analysis 

Campo, F., Giunti, S., & Mendola, M. (2024). Refugee crisis and right-wing populism: 

Evidence from the Italian Dispersal Policy. Retrieved from 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0014292124001557  

Carr, E. H. (1939). The twenty years' crisis, 1919–1939: An introduction to the study of 

international relations. London: Macmillan. Retrieved from 

https://hostnezt.com/cssfiles/internationalrelations/Twenty%20Years%20Crisis%20191

9%201939%20an%20Introduction%20to%20the%20Study%20of%20International%20

Relations%20By%20E%20H%20Carr.pdf 

77 

 
 
Children of Prisoners Europe. (n.d.). Foreign prisoners. Retrieved April 24, 2025, from 

https://childrenofprisoners.eu/facts_and_figures/foreign-detainees/ 

Colombo, M. (2017). The Representation of the “European Refugee Crisis” in Italy: 

Domopolitics, Securitization, and Humanitarian Communication in Political and 

Media Discourses. Retrieved from 

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/15562948.2017.1317896  

Council of the European Union. (2015). Justice and Home Affairs Council conclusions. 

Retrieved from https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/21906/st12002-re01en15.pdf 

Council of the European Union. (2015). Migratory crisis: Activating the IPCR mechanism. 

Retrieved from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2015/10/30/migratory-crisis-a

ctivating-ipcr/ 

Council of the European Union. (2016). Council Decision (EU) 2016/118: Establishing 

measures in the field of migration. Official Journal of the European Union. Retrieved 

from 

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016D0118&qid=

1454343903616&from=EN 

Council of the European Union. (2016). EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA. Retrieved 

from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/05/23/fac-eunavfor-soph

ia/ 

Council of the European Union. (2016). Refugee Facility for Turkey: EU pledges 3 billion 

euros. Retrieved from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/02/03/refugee-facility-fo

r-turkey/ 

78 

 
Council of the European Union. (2017). Schengen area: Prolongation of internal border 

controls. Retrieved from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2017/05/11/schengen-area-six

-month-prolongation-internal-border-controls/ 

Council of the European Union. (2018). Facility for refugees in Turkey: Member states 

agree details of additional funding. Retrieved from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2018/06/29/facility-for-refuge

es-in-turkey-member-states-agree-details-of-additional-funding/ 

Council of the European Union. (2018). Integrated Political Crisis Response (IPCR) 

mechanism. Retrieved from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/45843/ipcr-mechanism.pdf 

de Haas, H. (2010). The internal dynamics of migration processes: A theoretical inquiry. 

Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 36(10), 1587–1617. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/1369183X.2010.489361 

Dimitrov, A., & Angelov, G.  (2017) Refugee Integration in the EU: Challenges and 

Economic Impact. Retrieved from 

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Atanas-Dimitrov/publication/322870082_Refugee

_Integration_in_the_EU_Challenges_and_Economic_Impact/links/5a7384efa6fdcc53fe

1473ba/Refugee-Integration-in-the-EU-Challenges-and-Economic-Impact.pdf  

Dines, N., & Rigo, E. (2015). Postcolonial Italy: Immigration and the crisis of national 

identity. Modern Italy, 20(1), 77–92. 

https://www.academia.edu/15071119/Postcolonial_Citizenships_and_the_Refugeeizatio

n_of_the_Workforce_Migrant_Agricultural_Labor_in_the_Italian_Mezzogiorno  

79 

 
European Commission. (2014). Standard Eurobarometer 81: Public opinion in the 

European Union. Retrieved from 

https://ec.europa.eu/citizenship/pdf/spring_eurobarometer_july_2014.pdf 

European Commission. (2015a). European Agenda on Migration: First relocation 

proposal. Retrieved from 

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_15_5039 

European Commission. (2015b). European Agenda on Migration: Second package of 

measures. Retrieved from 

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_15_5596 

European Commission. (2017). Managing migration: EU financial support to Italy. 

Retrieved from 

https://home-affairs.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-01/202101_managing-migration-eu

-financial-support-to-italy_en.pdf 

European Commission. (2020). 2020 European Semester: Country report - Italy. 

Retrieved from 

https://commission.europa.eu/publications/2020-european-semester-country-reports_en 

European Commission. (2021). Italy country report: Regional disparities and economic 

trends. Retrieved from 

https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/2021-european-semester-country-reports_en 

European Commission. (2022). Special Eurobarometer: integration of immigrants in the 

European Union. Retrieved from 

https://migrant-integration.ec.europa.eu/library-document/special-eurobarometer-integr

ation-immigrants-european-union_en  

80 

 
European Council. (2016). EU pledge for Syrians: 3 billion euros support. Retrieved from 

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/02/04/eu-pledge-for-syri

ans/ 

European Parliament. (2020). Article 78(3) TFEU: Temporary protection and emergency 

migration response. Retrieved from 

https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/ATAG/2020/649325/EPRS_ATA(2020

)649325_EN.pdf 

European Union. (1992). Treaty on European Union. Retrieved from 

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:2bf140bf-a3f8-4ab2-b506-fd71826e6

da6.0023.02/DOC_1&format=PDF 

European Union. (2013). Dublin Regulation (Regulation (EU) No 604/2013). Retrieved 

from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2013/604/oj 

European Union. (2021). Unanimity voting in the EU. Retrieved from 

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=LEGISSUM:unanimity 

Eurostat. (2023). Asylum and first-time asylum applicants by citizenship, age, and sex – 

Annual aggregated data (rounded). Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat  

Finnemore, M., & Sikkink, K. (1998). International norm dynamics and political change. 

International Organization, 52(4), 887–917. https://doi.org/10.1162/002081898550789  

Finotelli, C., & Ponzo, I. (2018). Integration in times of economic decline: Migrant 

inclusion in Southern European welfare states. Journal of European Social Policy, 

28(2), 129–143. 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319405076_Integration_in_times_of_econom

ic_decline_Migrant_inclusion_in_Southern_European_societies_trends_and_theoretica

l_implications  

81 

 
Gattinara, P. (2018). Mobilizing against ‘the invasion’: Far right protest and the ‘refugee 

crisis’ in Italy. Retrieved from 

https://www.francoangeli.it/riviste/Scheda_rivista.aspx?IDArticolo=60914  

Geddes, A., & Scholten, P. (2016). The politics of migration and immigration in Europe 

(2nd ed.). London: SAGE Publications. 

https://sk.sagepub.com/book/mono/the-politics-of-migration-and-immigration-in-europ

e-second-edition/toc  

Gianfreda, S. (2017). Politicization of the refugee crisis?: a content analysis of 

parliamentary debates in Italy, the UK, and the EU in Cambridge University Press. 

Retrieved from 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/italian-political-science-review-rivista-italian

a-di-scienza-politica/article/abs/politicization-of-the-refugee-crisis-a-content-analysis-

of-parliamentary-debates-in-italy-the-uk-and-the-eu/3FA5C8EDF1CFCF2B9E5DE5A2

0F91B18E  

International Organization for Migration. (n.d.). IOM monitors migrant and refugee 

arrivals in Europe. Retrieved from 

https://www.iom.int/news/iom-monitors-migrant-refugee-arrivals-europe  

International Organization for Migration. (n.d.). Irregular migrant and refugee arrivals in 

Europe top one million in 2015. Retrieved from 

https://www.iom.int/news/irregular-migrant-refugee-arrivals-europe-top-one-million-20

15-iom  

International Organization for Migration. (n.d.). Migrants continue to arrive in Europe; 

asylum seekers relocated. Retrieved from 

https://www.iom.int/news/migrants-continue-arrive-europe-asylum-seekers-relocated  

82 

 
International Organization for Migration. (n.d.). Missing Migrants Project: 

Mediterranean. Retrieved from https://missingmigrants.iom.int/region/mediterranean  

Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (ISTAT). (2013). Demographic indicators – Year 2013. 

Retrieved from https://www.istat.it/en/press-release/demographic-indicators-year-2013  

Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (ISTAT). (2018). Demographic indicators – Year 2018. 

Retrieved from https://www.istat.it/en/press-release/demographic-indicators-year-2018  

Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (ISTAT). (2021). Regional gross domestic product – Years 

2014–2020. Retrieved from https://www.istat.it/en/archive/regional-accounts  

Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (ISTAT). (2022). Resident foreign population by region and 

citizenship. Retrieved from https://demo.istat.it/index_e.html  

Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (ISTAT). (2024). Safety1. Retrieved April 24, 2025, from 

https://www.istat.it/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/7.pdf  

Lavenex, S. (2018). "Failing forward" towards which Europe? Organized hypocrisy in the 

common European asylum system. Journal of European Public Policy, 25(3), 407–426. 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348248144_The_EU-Turkey_deal_in_the_20

15_'refugee_crisis'_when_intergovernmentalism_cast_a_shadow_on_the_EU's_normati

ve_power 

Mabogunje, A. L. (1970). Systems approach to a theory of rural–urban migration. 

Geographical Analysis, 2(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-4632.1970.tb00140.x  

Massey, D. S., Arango, J., Hugo, G., Kouaouci, A., Pellegrino, A., & Taylor, J. E. (1993). 

Theories of international migration: A review and appraisal. Population and 

Development Review, 19(3), 431–466. https://doi.org/10.2307/2938462  

Ministero dell’Interno. (2013). Elezioni politiche del 24–25 febbraio 2013 – Camera dei 

Deputati. Retrieved from 

83 

 
https://elezionistorico.interno.gov.it/index.php?tpel=C&dtel=24/02/2013&tpa=I&tpe=

A&lev0=0  

Ministero dell’Interno. (2014). Elezioni europee del 25 maggio 2014. Retrieved from 

https://elezionistorico.interno.gov.it/index.php?tpel=E&dtel=25/05/2014&tpa=I&tpe=A

&lev0=0  

Ministero dell’Interno. (2018a). Reception of migrants and refugees in Italy: Report with 

data and policies. Retrieved from 

https://www.libertaciviliimmigrazione.dlci.interno.gov.it/sites/default/files/allegati/rapp

orto_accoglienza_eng_isbn_appendice_rev3b.pdf  

Ministero dell’Interno. (2018b). Elezioni politiche del 4 marzo 2018 – Camera dei 

Deputati. Retrieved from 

https://elezionistorico.interno.gov.it/index.php?tpel=C&dtel=04/03/2018&tpa=I&tpe=

A&lev0=0  

Ministero dell’Interno. (2019). Elezioni europee del 26 maggio 2019. Retrieved from 

https://elezionistorico.interno.gov.it/index.php?tpel=E&dtel=26/05/2019&tpa=I&tpe=A

&lev0=0  

Molnár, A. (2019). Italy and the Mediterranean Refugee Crisis. Retrieved from Italy and 

the Mediterranean Refugee Crisis 

Morgenthau, H. J. (1948). Politics among nations: The struggle for power and peace. New 

York: Alfred A. Knopf. Retrieved from 

http://slantchev.ucsd.edu/courses/ps240/04%20Conflict%20with%20States%20as%20

Unitary%20Actors/Morgenthau%20-%20Politics%20among%20nations%20(selected%

20chapters).pdf  

Open Migration. (2019). Asylum shopping. Retrieved from 

https://openmigration.org/en/glossary-term/asylum-shopping/  

84 

 
Open Society Foundations. (2015). Open Society Initiative for Europe: Our grantees 2015. 

Retrieved from 

https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/uploads/cd6e5010-c2d2-4938-b3d6-058b896f

6877/open-society-initiative-for-europe-2015-20170424.pdf  

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2015). Labour 

market reform for more and better quality jobs in Italy. Retrieved from 

https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/labour-market-reform-for-more-and-better-qualit

y-jobs-in-italy_5jrqhrw7rfzq-en.html  

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2019). 

Strengthening active labour market policies in Italy. Retrieved from  

https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/strengthening-active-labour-market-policies-in-it

aly_160a3c28-en.html  

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2022). OECD 

regions and cities at a glance 2022: Italy – Country note. Retrieved from 

https://www.oecd.org/regional/italy-regions-and-cities-2022.pdf  

Pew Research Center. (2018). Europeans not convinced immigration is good or bad for 

their country. Retrieved from 

https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2018/09/10/europeans-not-convinced-immigration

-is-good-or-bad-for-their-country/  

Triandafyllidou, A. (2016). Governing Irregular Migration and Asylum at the borders of 

Europe: Between efficiency and dignity. Comparative Migration Studies, 4(1), 1–17. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40878-015-0016-0 

Triandafyllidou, A. (2018). A “Refugee Crisis” unfolding: “Real” events and their 

interpretation in media and political debates. Journal of Immigrant & Refugee Studies, 

16(1–2), 198–216. https://doi.org/10.1080/15562948.2017.1309089 

85 

 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). (2023). Operational data 

portal – Mediterranean situation. Retrieved from 

https://data.unhcr.org/en/situations/europe  

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). (n.d.). Italy Sea Arrivals 

Dashboard. Retrieved from 

https://data.unhcr.org/en/situations/europe-sea-arrivals/location/24521  

Wæver, O. (1995). Securitization and desecuritization. In R. D. Lipschutz (Ed.), On 

security (pp. 46–86). New York: Columbia University Press. Retrieved from 

https://www.libraryofsocialscience.com/assets/pdf/Waever-Securitization.pdf  

Wendt, A. (1992). Anarchy is what states make of it: The social construction of power 

politics. International Organization, 46(2), 391–425. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300027764  

World Bank. (2023). Unemployment, Italy. Retrieved from 

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS?locations=IT  

World Bank. (2025). Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) – Italy. Retrieved from 

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS?locations=IT  

World Prison Brief. (n.d.). Italy. Institute for Crime & Justice Policy Research. Retrieved 

April 24, 2025, from https://www.prisonstudies.org/country/italy  

86 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
