NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

ECONOMICS AND ECONOMIC POLICY

MASTER’S DEGREE

19.05.25

THE ROLE OF COCONUT ENDOWMENT IN INTENSIFYING INTERNAL

CONFLICTS:

THE EVIDENCE FROM NATIONAL AND SUBNATIONAL DATA

Tweneboah Rabbi †

Master’s Thesis

Supervisor:

Associate Professor Dmitry A. Veselov

Reviewer:

Associate Professor Alina Gennadyevna Shirshikova

† E-mail: rtveneboakh@edu.hse.ru

I would like to thank my supervisors, Dmitry A. Veselov, for his constructive comments that made the conception
of the idea possible, as well as the entire team of the "Topics on long-run economic growth and development"
research group.

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Coconut and Insurrection — Anecdotal Evidence

3 Competing Theoretical Underpinnings

3.1 Opportunity-cost mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Rapacity Effect

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Mechanisms: Coconut and Internal Conflict

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Coconut Endowment and Country Level Conflict

4.1 Data Sources and Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.1 Country-level Conflict Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.2 Coconut Endowment data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.3 Baseline Control Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Estimating Equation and Empirical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.1 Alternative Definition of Coconut endowment and cutoffs . . . . . . .

4.3.2 Coconut and Historical Conflict

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.3 Other robustness checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Coconut Endowment and Cell Level Conflict

5.1 Data Sources and Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1.1 Cell-level Conflict Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1.2 Cell-level Coconut Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Identification Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Empirical Results

6.1 Baseline Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2 Coconut Suitability and Conflict Typology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.1 Territorial vs. Governmental Conflict Dimensions

. . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.2 Coconut and Type of Violent Event

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.3 Coconut and Conflict Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.4 Heterogeneous Effects: Quality of Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

7

8

10

11

11

14

16

16

16

17

19

21

24

24

27

27

28

28

28

30

32

34

34

36

36

37

39

39

6.5 Heterogeneous Effects: Geographic Conduciveness

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.6 Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.6.1 Addressing Potential Bias in World Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.6.2 Addressing Spatial Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Conclusion

A Country-Level Appendix

42

43

43

44

44

A.1

A-1 Country-level Coconut Suitability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.1

A-2 Evaluation of the Instrumental Variable Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.1

A-3 Robustness to Historical Determinants of Economic Development

. . . . . . A.3

A-4 Robustness to Historical Agricultural Controls

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.4

A-5 Robustness to Deep Geographical and Civilizational Histories . . . . . . . . . A.4

A-6 Robustness to Diversity and Ethnic Confounders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.5

B Cell-Level Appendix

B.1

B-1 Preliminary Analysis—Visual Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B.1

B-2 Construction of International Price of Coconut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B.2

B-3 Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B.2

Abstract

Can heightened demand for a seemingly inconsequential agricultural commodity—coconut

influence the risk of armed insurgencies? This study offers novel evidence on this ques-

tion by leveraging cross-country variation in coconut cultivation suitability to assess

the causal effect of coconut endowment on intrastate insurgent activity. Furthermore,

the findings are reinforced by a fine-grained analysis at the 30 arc-minute resolution in

Southeastern Asia and Oceania. The results suggest that an increase in the potential

value of coconut-derived commodity is a significant driver of civil armed conflict both at

the national and subnational levels. As presented in the most parsimonious specification

of the cell level analysis, a 10% increase in the price of coconut-related commodities

increases the probability of civil strife by 0.14 percentage points (pp) in cells suited for

production. I reconcile the documented results with the extortion mechanism and a

modified opportunity cost framework—wherein the rise in the value of this agricultural

commodity increases the opportunity cost of engaging in productive activity relative to

predation. Through heterogeneity analysis the study is able to underpin key conditions—

weak state institution and geographic conduciveness—that amplify the hypothesized

extortionary channel.

1 Introduction

The post-World War II era has witnessed a dramatic transformation in global violence, with

internal strife emerging as the dominant scourge in modern world. This is evidently reflected

in the Uppsala Conflict Data Program’s (UCDP) and the United Nations High Commission for

Refugees (UNHCR) 2018 report, documenting over 53,000 battle-related deaths from civil

wars alone. This alarming trend has spawned generations of scholarly inquiry into (internal)

conflict drivers. Ironically, one systematically highlighted factor is natural resources—"from
blood diamonds in Sierra Leone to banana plantation in Philippines" (Olsson, 2007; Crost
and Felter, 2020)—the link between resource richness and violence manifest across diverse

contexts.

For instance, high-valued export crops present a compelling paradox in development eco-

nomics. While policymakers and experts frequently champion these crops as engines for

growth and poverty reduction—partly driven by the fact that they require higher labour input

and have higher profit margins per acre compared to staple crops (Humphrey, 2005; , FAO;

Bank, 2011)—this optimistic view often overlooks their potential to exacerbate inequality

and instability, especially in fragile states. Studies such as Iyigun, Nunn and Qian (2017);

Biscaye (2023) have additionally established that permanent and transient agricultural

shocks, resulting from abrupt changes in productivity or market conditions may also elevate

or reduce the risk of intrastate conflict. A well-documented parallel exists in extractive

industries, where armed groups systematically exploit mineral resources through both direct

control and indirect collusion with firms (Berman et al., 2017; Dube and Vargas, 2013; Ross,

2004; Collier and Hoeffler, 2004).1

Despite a large corpus of literature on resource-related conflicts, studies have disproportion-

ately focused on extractive minerals (e.g., oil, diamonds) while largely neglecting agricultural

commodities—an oversight particularly puzzling given their labour—intensive nature which

is often accompanied optimistic view.2 Existing studies on agriculture—conflict relation

have often focused on the impact of commodity price fluctuations, which has been viewed

as an external income shock, in relation to the relationship between primary commodi-

ties and armed civil conflict (Besley and Persson, 2008; Brückner and Ciccone, 2010). In

1 A particularly egregious case involves AngloGold Ashanti’s alleged cooperation with the Nationalist and
Integrationist Front (FNI), a rebel faction in the Democratic Republic of Congo, "...to effective take control over
the Mongbwalu gold mining area, to facilitate their gold exploration activities.” (See Human Rights Watch
(2005, p.65) for more details).

2 A World Bank analysis posited that encouraging labour-intensive export sectors in fragile nations may even

mitigate conflict intensity and risk (Calì, 2014).

1

contrast to mineral resources, which studies have predominantly documented a positive

relationship with internal conflict, the relation between agricultural commodity value and

internal conflict remains equivocal. Generally the nexus between primary commodities and

conflict is not straightforward; it depends greatly on the specific commodity in question. The

recent resource-related conflict literature summary by Blair, Christensen and Rudkin (2021)

provides a sound illustration of this.

Conflict literature in economic and political sciences often rest on rationality. Based on

Keen (2005) view of internal violence several theoretical assertions have been proposed to

explain intrastate violence. Popular amongst them are the opportunity cost and rapacity

effects; on one hand, the opportunity cost channel establishes that an increase in prices of

labour-intensive (capital-intensive) goods reduces (increase) the likelihood of armed conflict.

On the other hand, the economic benefits of controlling resources like oil and gas increases

in tandem with rising prices for capital-intensive commodities. This increases the financial

rewards for participating in insurgence. Recent studies (e.g., (Crost and Felter, 2020; Gantier,

2020; Berman et al., 2017; Bazzi and Blattman, 2014)) have began to suggest alternative

explanations for resource-conflict relation, especially in agriculture (i.e., lootability and

bulkiness, perennial crop, and cash crops). As mentioned prior, ambiguity persist especially

in agricultural commodity shocks. This paper fills that gap by examining coconut, a globally

traded perennial crop with a longstanding history of colonial and post-colonial exploitation.

Coconut cultivation presents an intriguing backdrop to further understanding on resource—

conflict paradox. On one hand, it is a labour-intensive crop, which—according to standard

opportunity cost theory—should reduce conflict by raising incomes (Bazzi and Blattman,

2014). On the other hand, historical and contemporary anecdotes suggests that coconut-rich

regions are frequently plagued with violent contestation.

Historical accounts that the global increase in demand for copra—the dried kernel of the

coconut—can trigger armed insurgencies. Copra has played a historically significant role

in the global economy, particularly in the post-World War II era, highlights its important

function beyond that of an agricultural product. As argued by Asba et al. (2020), copra

was widely regarded as "green gold" and constituted the fundamental pillar of economic

development(for instance in Eastern Indonesia) during this period. To briefly elaborate; it

was not until the late periods of the 19th century that European started trading and converting

copra into coconut oil, which became their main raw material for the soap and margarine

industries. The substitution of animal fat with vegetable fat in the margarine, cooking oil,

2

Figure 1. Vegetable oil prices, 1977-2005. Sourced from Warner, Quirke and Longmore (2007)

and soap industries resulted in a worldwide increase in the demand for copra. In 1920, the

European industrial countries used almost 200 million pounds of coconut oil as their industry

inputs. As Figure 1 demonstrates, the global demand trajectory culminated in coconut oil

emerging as the world’s most valuable vegetable oil by the 1980s–a testament to its enduring

economic significance.

To take advantage of the global burst in the demand for coconut, various strategic initiatives

were pursued by colonial governments in their colonies to enhance copra production which

often resulted in dramatic shifts of conventional land use and social structures. These kinds of

policies led to social dislocation, labour exploitation, and land dispossession—events that his-

torically incited resentment and drove communities toward grievances and uprising (Cerepak,

2019; Droessler, 2018). Even post-independence governments often continued extractive

policies, leading to tensions and creation of an environment conducive for insurgencies (see

section 2 for a systematic review on various anecdotal accounts).

I take this longstanding historical account to data and ask "why does coconut, a seemingly

benign agricultural commodity, appear to exacerbate internal conflicts in ways that contradict
standard opportunity cost predictions (often link with agricultural commodities)"? To the best
of my knowledge, this study mark the first systematic economic analysis of the relationship

between coconut and internal conflict. There are several benefits moving beyond existing

anecdotal evidence; (i) though there exist a limited number of qualitative accounts coconut-

conflict relation, its unclear how important coconut serve as a predictor of internal conflict

3

(i.e., by how much it contributes to conflict is non-existing) and (ii) the existing cases on this

relationship often dates back in the early 19th century, hence it is possible that the association

depicted in the anecdotes has weakened over time—especially since there exist many close

substitutes for coconut today than before.

Prior to the empirical inquiry, the study builds upon existing theoretical frameworks of

commodity-induced conflict (Crost and Felter, 2020) and historical case evidence to develop a

conceptual model to rationalize coconut–conflict relation. The proposed framework identifies

two fundamental mechanisms through which coconut endowments may systematically

increase conflict risk: the extortion and opportunity cost channel. One one hand, a rising

value of coconut or its derived commodity may either incentivise the state or rebel groups

to impose often ridiculous taxes to capture rents. Depending on the response of coconut

producers/exporters may spark local violence. On the other hand, the high upfront costs

and long maturation periods (3–10 years) deter new investment (either new entrants or

expanding existing farmland)—which implies that the opportunity cost of engaging in

peaceful production to capture often temporary market booms becomes extremely high

relative to predating existing plantations (i.e., the labour-intensiveness of coconut cultivation

does not manifest due to high sunk cost). What is more interesting is that the study delineated

three significant characteristics of coconut cultivation that may support the extortion channel

outlined therein. (1) Colonial influences on state institutional development resulted in the

creation of fragile and extractive state institutions, facilitating rent-seeking behaviour; (2)

the perennial nature of coconut cultivation makes it easier for the state to impose extractive

taxation and capture long-term rents; and (3) The commodity flourishes in lowland and

coastal regions, rendering it readily accessible for state control and conducive to looting

illicit trade by insurgents.3

The empirical investigation of the study are provided in two folds; a cross-country analysis

and a fined-grained level to capture much dynamics in local violence. As in any empirical

study, production and export data on coconut or its derived products are rarely available,

hence, both the cross-country and subnational cell level layers of this study leveraged on a

time-invariant geo-climatic assessment of crop suitability. Similar strategy has been applied

in scholarly works of Nunn and Qian (2011); Iyigun, Nunn and Qian (2017). The study

focuses specifically on intrastate conflict—defined as organized violence occurring within

3 Detailed discussion on theoretical reasoning connecting coconut and internal violence is presented in

section 3 and 3.3.

4

state borders without intervention from any foreign forces. The analysis at the country

level is operationalized at the global scale (i.e., incorporating all available national data

irrespective of coconut production status). This offers an advantage of avoiding sampling

selection bias by preventing arbitrary exclusion of non-producing states.

The results at both the country and subnational level suggest a positive relationship between

coconut endowment and state-based insurrections.4 Cross-country ordinary least squares

(OLS) estimates reveal that a shift from the 10th to the 90th percentile in coconut suitability

corresponds to a 70.1pp increase (expressed in standard deviations) in the likelihood of

civil conflict occurrence. However, no significant relationship is observed between coconut

endowment and the onset of new conflicts. These results remain robust to a range of potential

confounding factors.

Despite these patterns, the analysis does not establish causality due to possible measurement

error, omitted variable bias, and reverse causality. To address these limitations, the study

employs an instrumental variable (IV) approach for further identification. The Global Agro-

Ecological Zones (GAEZ) database provides comprehensive assessments of crop suitability

worldwide, including detailed classifications of land into various ecological zones. Leveraging

this data, I developed a measure representing the proportion of a country’s cropland catego-

rized as sub-humid tropical lowland. This variable is used to exploit exogenous variation in

coconut suitability—hence able to establish a causal impact of coconut endowment on civil

conflict (refer to section A-2 for a thorough discussion on the instrument).

Given the paucity of the coconut suitability data, the subnational cell level analysis is confined

to Southeastern Asia and Oceania. This layer of the analysis constitute yearly panel of 2,668

cells of 30 arc-minute resolution (approximately 55 × 55 kilometres at the Equator, the

widely used PRIO-grid, Tollefsen, Strand and Buhaug (2012)) from 1989-2019. The analysis

presented at this level constitute two exogenous sources of variations of coconut, one spatial

and one temporal, both of which are arguably exogenous to local conditions. The spatial

dimension of coconut comes from the subnational version of the GAEZ crop suitability

data.5 For temporal variation, I constructed a price index for international price of coconut-

derivatives based on the methodology outlined by Bazzi and Blattman (2014)6 Building on

4 The main internal conflict type analysed at this level is state-based conflict—relying on the Uppsala Conflict

Data Program’s Armed Conflict Dataset (hereafter, UCDP-ACD).

5 The coconut suitability data, measured at a high-resolution 5 arc-minute grid, was aggregated to match

the broader 30 arc-minute cell framework used in the analysis.

6 See section B-2 of the Appendix file for details on the construction of world export price of coconut-derived

commodity.

5

established methodologies in the resource-conflict literature (McGuirk and Burke, 2020;

Bazzi and Blattman, 2014; Berman et al., 2017; Girard et al., 2022; Dube and Vargas, 2013),

this study adapts the commodity price shock framework to examine coconut-related conflicts.

I estimate a panel data model with two high-dimensional fixed-effects; cell and year-country-

specific fixed effects, which controls for any time-invariant local unobservable feature (such

as remoteness and geo-climatic features) and unobserved time-varying effects at the country

level (including macroeconomic shocks, political changes and labour market regulations).

The approach enables systematic comparison of conflict patterns across regions with varying

coconut cultivation potential, while exploiting exogenous fluctuations in global coconut

prices. This identification strategy rests on a crucial assumption that no contemporaneous

shocks simultaneously with coconut price increases and affect conflict risk in ways corre-

lated with local cultivation suitability. To address potential threats to this assumption and

strengthen causal inference, the analysis where possible incorporates a handful of cell-varying

characteristics that could otherwise confound the estimated relationship. The results from

this procedure corroborates with the findings at the cross-country level; increase in the

economic value of coconut-derived commodities increases internal civil conflict in cells that

produce this commodity intensely. Specifically, the findings indicate that a 10% coconut

price hike increases civil (not non-state based) conflict probability by 0.19 pp in suitable

areas, driven by territorial (not governance) disputes and armed battles (not riots/protests).

The findings were stable to a number of sensitivity checks.

The last section of the subnational analysis was dedicated to tests the presence of heteroge-

neous effects through a triple interaction in the high-dimensional fixed effect model to confirm

the assertions made about conditions that enables the hypothesized extortion channel to

persist. The first exercise conducted revealed that the impact coconut endowment may have

on civil conflict is contingent on a state’s institutional quality level. This provide subjective

evidence that colonial imprints have persisted and led to the formation of extractive state

institutions in coconut producing regions. The second part of this heterogeneity analysis

also revealed that the geographic conduciveness of coconut cultivation (lowland and coastal

areas) negligible effect on the price shocks of the commodity and violent insurgence.

6

1.1 Contribution

This study makes three primary contribution to the extant literature on development eco-

nomics. The first is the discourse on commodity markets and internal conflict. The scholarly

literature has long been characterized by inconclusive findings regarding the impact of

agriculture commodity on conflict dynamics, particularly at the country-level. Pivotal studies

by (Brückner and Ciccone, 2010) suggest that increases in the value of export commodities

heighten the risk of civil conflicts across nations. Conversely, (Besley and Persson, 2008)

observe a reduction in conflict with rising commodity values. Such mixed results across these

cross-country analyses have underscored the necessity for more granular investigations that

separate the impacts attributable to different types of commodities and focus on microlevel,

within-country contexts (Bazzi and Blattman, 2014). Dube and Vargas (2013) demonstrated

that increases in the price of an agricultural commodity (coffee) led to decreases in conflict in

the coffee-producing regions of Colombia, but an increase in the price of a mineral commodity

(oil) led to an increase in violence in oil-producing regions. Even in the mist of these incon-

clusive results, a large stark of literature on agricultural commodity shocks and civil conflict

tend to favour the opportunity cost mechanism; thereby suggesting a negative relationship.

The present study add to the limited number of works (e.g. (Crost and Felter, 2020)) that

finds that an increase in the value of agricultural commodity exacerbate conflict; reinforcing

the notion that conflict—reducing effect of agricultural commodities is not universal. This

study further contributes to the large corpus of literature on historical persistence by demon-

strating how colonial-era agricultural systems continue to shape modern conflict dynamics

through institutional path dependence. While existing research has established the enduring

effects of history on conflict (Moscona, Nunn and Robinson, 2020; Arbatlı et al., 2020);

belief systems (Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011; Lowes et al., 2017); growth and development

(Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2014; Alesina, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016);

institutions formation (Giuliano and Nunn, 2013); and health (Fenske and Wang, 2023),

the present study provide novel evidence that colonial crop regimes—particularly coconut

plantation systems—created extractive institutional frameworks that persist in post-colonial

states. Finally, the study makes some contribution to the literature documenting the role

of geography on a set of diverse outcomes (Nunn and Puga, 2012; McLauchlin, 2014).

The findings of the present study provides subjective evidence on the role of geography

in enabling insurgencies; (1) elevation enabling state control and (2) coastal accessibility

enabling looting and predation.

7

The remainder of the study in structured as follows. Sections 2 and 3 is dedicated to

synthesizing various anecdotal evidence linking coconut and violent insurrections as well

as various theoretical frameworks underpinning resource–conflict relation. In Sections 4, 5,

and 6, I present the empirical framework, data sources, and results at the country level and

subnational cell level. Finally, Section 7 provide concluding remarks based on the findings of

the study.

2 Coconut and Insurrection — Anecdotal Evidence

Coconut palm, often romanticized as a symbol of tropical tranquillity, have historically served

as catalysts for social unrest, economic exploitation, and armed conflict. From colonial-era

plantation disputes to modern-day biofuel revolutions, the coconut’s economic value and eco-

logical ubiquity have made it a focal point for struggles over land, labour, and resource control.

This nexus emerges not merely as a historical event but as a consequence of global economic

forces intersecting with colonial legacies. Scholarly narration often trace this relationship to

the late 19th-century surge in copra demand—a pivotal moment that transformed coconuts

from subsistence crops into commodities enmeshed in imperial trade networks (Cerepak,

2019; Droessler, 2018). The discussion on these narratives begins with the imposition of

European plantation systems during the mid-19th century, which systematically dismantled

indigenous agroecological practices and reconfigured land tenure.7 Colonial administrators,

incentivized by copra’s rising value as a raw material for soap, margarine, and industrial

lubricants, introduced European plantations methods to the production of coconut across

South and Southeast Asia, the Pacific, and the Caribbean. The accounts given by Cerepak

(2019):

"...British copra plantations in Ceylon (modern-day Sri Lanka), established in the

1840s, displaced traditional subsistence farming practices and concentrated land

ownership among foreign investors. By 1860 British land owners had planted

roughly 250,000 acres. By 1903, coconut plantations covered 650,000 acres. The

number reached one million acres by 1926."

The Philippines, then a U.S. colony, experienced a dramatic expansion in coconut cultivation

during the early 20th century, driven by soaring American demand for copra. Between

7 According to the report by World Rainforest Movement (2023), these were often accompanied by large-scale

land grabbing and monoculture plantation.

8

1910 and 1926, the territory’s coconut plantation acreage nearly tripled, skyrocketing

from 406,000 acres to 1.166 million acres. However, this increased plantation often was

accompanied by indigenes losing their ancestral land to large American corporations. This

led the establishment of the Philippines Organic Act:

"...The Philippine Organic Act, introduced in July 1902, prevented individuals

from owning more than 16 hectares of land and corporations from owning more

than 1,024 hectares. Originally, William Taft, then governor of the Philippines,

asked for a limit of 20,000 acres for corporations (Cerepak, 2019)."8

Droessler (2018) used a Samoan proverb “E suamalie a niu ‘a‘ati” (“The coconut is sweet, but
it was husked with the teeth”) to symbolize how copra brought both economic opportunity

and colonial exploitation—popularly called ’coconut colonialism’. His accounts suggest

that the growing demand for copra led to extensive land sales to European and colonial

businesses. These land concessions often involved minimal regulation, enabling foreign

planters to acquire large tracts—sometimes multiple times over—fuelling disputes among

local factions. He writes:

"...Driven by growing demand for copra, the Deutsche Handels- und Plantagenge-

sellschaft der Südseeinseln (DHPG) dramatically expanded its plantation (as well

as introduce wage plantation)9 holdings by purchasing land from Samoan matai.

Euro-American planters were so desperate for Samoan land (and regulations were

so minimal) that Samoans were able to sell the same parcels of land to several

buyers. Samoans were divided over these escalating land sales to foreigners.

Some feared that foreign ownership would undermine long-standing ways of

life based on subsistence agriculture, whereas others welcomed the considerable

profits they reaped from the sales. These profits often came in the form of Western

arms which matai used to gain an advantage over their rivals. The result was

what Euro-American observers innocently called ‘civil war’, ignoring the fact that

Euro-American traders and plantation owners actively supported different sides

of competing Samoan lineages and supplied them with the means to succeed. A

vicious cycle of selling land for arms ensued."

8 Landless farmers also became tenants on elite-owned coconut estates, paying exorbitant rents (up to 50%

of harvests)

9 The report emphasized that Samoan farmers who worked on Euro-American plantation were exploited
and underpaid by about 30–50%. In most part of the anecdote, their approach backfired, resulting in the birth
of local cooperatives (known as ”oloa”), which formed an anti-colonial resistance, attempting to restore control
over copra production.

9

Even after World War II, as nations in the region began gaining independence, coconut

producers encountered new economic challenges. According to (Cerepak, 2019), Indonesia’s

first president, Sukarno, sought to integrate the outer islands, including Sulawesi, into the

national framework to consolidate the country post-colonial rule. This integration effort

was met with resistance from coconut growers in Sulawesi, who rebelled and engaged in

the smuggling of coconut products to exchange for gold and arms. In a similar vein, the

documentary "Coconut Revolution" illustrates the resistance movement by the indigenous

people of Bougainville Island against the Papua New Guinea army and the mining operations

planned by Rio Tinto Zinc (RTZ) against environmental degradation and grabbing.10

The coco levy scandal in the Philippines best exemplifies state-sanctioned resource ex-

ploitation. The government taxed coconut farmers under Ferdinand Marcos’s dictatorship

(1965–1986), supposedly to stabilize prices. The tax, estimated at P20 billion (US$370

million), was instead directed to Marcos cronies, bankrupting smallholders. In 2014, coconut

farmers embarked on a 1,772-km protest march to demand restitution, framing the levy as

emblematic of systemic agrarian injustice.

3 Competing Theoretical Underpinnings

Economic theories of civil war—which are grounded in rationality—underpin the vast corpus

of empirical research that examines the relationship between primary commodities and

civil conflict and other violence occurrence. As argued by (Keen, 2005), violence persist

not because of the breakdown of rationality, but because violence itself can serve rational

economic objectives. Over the past few decades, a range of conceptualizations—drawing on

insights from economics and political science (i.e., logic appealing)—have emerged to explain

different forms of internal conflict. Among the most prominent are the rapacity effect and

opportunity cost effect. This section provides an overview of these key conceptual frameworks

and examines their potential relevance in understanding the relationship between coconut

endowment and internal conflict.

10 The documentary highlights the pivotal role coconut played in the resistance: the isolated islanders relied
on coconut to produce various essentials, including food oil, cleaning agents for their weapons, mosquito
repellent, engine oil, and even electricity, thus sustaining their fight during the international sanctions.

10

3.1 Opportunity-cost mechanism

This theory draws on the economic logic of cost-benefit analysis as applied to potential

rebels—individuals who could be recruited by armed groups. The decision to join a rebellion

hinges on a rational assessment of expected gains versus the risks and forgone alternatives

(i.e., individuals can choose to peacefully produce or prey on others) (Becker, 1968). This

notion has been well formalized in general equilibrium models of insurgences by (Hirshleifer,

1995; Grossman, 1991), where civilian’s incentive to form or join rebel activities hinges on

changes in household income and economic opportunities.

From this perspective, two important distinction of primary commodities are considered,

namely, labor–intensive and capital–intensive commodity. As summarized by Bazzi and

Blattman (2014), this distinction between commodities is important as they have differential

impact on household income. Labor-intensive commodities (e.g., agricultural goods) are

typically produced by households, meaning price shocks directly affect disposable income and,

consequently, the opportunity cost of rebellion. In contrast, capital-intensive commodities

(e.g., minerals, fuels) generate rents that primarily accrue to the state, with only indirect

effects on household welfare—via public goods provision, fiscal transfers, or derived labor

demand. These indirect channels may even be muted or counterbalanced by relative price

adjustments; example, a fall in capital–intensive primary export commodity raises the relative

returns to labor (Bazzi and Blattman, 2014). This theory predicts a strong inverse relationship

between insurrection and the prices of labor-intensive commodities (see (Dube and Vargas,

2013; Dal Bó and Dal Bó, 2011) for a detailed discussion). On other hand, higher prices

for capital-intensive or easily appropriable commodities—such as extractive minerals and

fuels-may increase the likelihood of conflict since the benefits of expropriation exceeds the

associated cost (Berman et al., 2017; Jablonski and Oliver, 2013; Rigterink, 2020). These

dynamics highlight how the type of commodity shocks may alter the production-predation

equilibrium, with the overall impact depending on the interplay of household-level income

changes and state capture.

3.2 Rapacity Effect

Unlike the opportunity cost channel, rapacity does not particularly distinguish between

the kind of commodity (whether labor–intensive or capital–intensive) shock, however, two

opposing transmissions are discussed; (i) ’state prize’ and ’state capacity’.

11

State-Prize: The core-underpinning of this mechanism is that rising commodity prices
increase resource rent derived from controlling it (Ross, 2004; Besley and Persson, 2008).

The theory posits that heightened resource valuation intensifies conflict dynamics by altering

the payoff structure of political violence, as actors vie for dominance over revenue streams.11

Crucially, Bazzi and Blattman (2014) argued that the magnitude of rent-driven conflict effects

is very much contingent upon the institutional quality and characteristics of the commodity

(i.e., the ease of capturing potential rent). In this regard, less cohesive governance regimes

and extractive state institutions lower the barriers of rent capture, amplifying the violence-

inducing potential of price shocks. Whereas robust institutions may weaken or mitigate such

incentives through credible deterrence, rent redistribution, and accountability.

Discussion of the characteristics of the commodity works in similar notion to the institutional

quality. Particularly, some commodities are easier to capture rent than others; one line

of this discussion outlined in several empirical studies related to natural resources is the

so called "lootability and extortion" (e.g., (Berman et al., 2017)). Commodities that are

immobile, geographically concentrated resources (e.g., non-alluvial, capital-intensive mining

and petroleum extraction) or have high switching costs are more susceptible to impose

rentable taxes. At the same time, portable and high-value commodities (e.g., gemstones,

alluvial deposits) may be vulnerable to direct seizure due to their high value-to-weight ratios,

ease of extraction with minimal technology, and low transport costs (Snyder and Bhavnani,

2005). Another strand of this ease of rent capture which is often related (but sometimes

suggesting opposite direction) to the opportunity cost discussed above relates to high-valued

export crops and perennial crops. Generally, the opportunity cost channel suggests that

labour-intensive commodities (often associated with agricultural commodities) reduces risk of

insurrections. However, crops such as lumber and rubber as well as perennial tree crops like

coffee and cocoa (Bazzi and Blattman, 2014) often require a large initial capital investment,

and are easily inspected, making them natural targets for taxation (either from the state or

rebel group), hence, may reduce or increase the risk of insurrection (ambiguous direction in

both theoretical or empirical studies).12

11 The literature delineates two principal pathways through which this may occur. (i) Rebel appropriation
("booty futures"), wherein armed groups exploit high-value resources to fund insurgencies (Berman et al., 2017;
Ross, 2004); (ii) Cross-border predation ("greedy neighbors"), where external actors—including adjacent states,
communities, or foreign entities—intervene to capture rents, often by financing proxy rebellions (Adhvaryu
et al., 2021; Humphreys, 2005).

12 Perineal crops and other exportable crops may raise household-income (at least to those directly involved
in its cultivation) but at the same time raises the incentives for strategic rent capture (Gantier, 2020; Crost and
Felter, 2020).

12

State capacity: A less popular mechanism seldom discussed in the rapacity channel is
the state capacity. Here, scholars suggest that the increase in the value of primary commodity

should not increase armed insurgence but either have no effect or even reduce the likelihood

of armed conflict (see (Ross, 2012; Snyder, 2006)). The rationale is that governments might

use the additional revenues from higher commodity prices to enhance state capacity, either

by bolstering their military capabilities to deter insurgencies or buy out potential rebel

groups. Contrary to the state prize effect, state capacity contends that rising commodity

values should reduce the likelihood of conflict onsets and shorten ongoing ones, especially in

poorer and more weakly institutionalized states. Another way of looking at this is to consider

if rebel group monopolize control over a resource. This is discussed formally below as it is

also shallow to conclude that state capacity always results in lowering risk of insurgence. As

described in the literature summary by (Crost and Felter, 2020) on contest–success theories of

political violence. His discussion on seminal works by Hirshleifer (1995); Skaperdas (1996);

Kalyvas (2006) provide a further layer on the intricacy of explaining internal violence from

the lens of state-capacity. Contest-success functions predicts a hump-shaped relationship

between the relative capacity of two conflicting groups and the amount of violence.

Figure 2. Insurgent strength and conflict violence: Predictions from contest–success models. Sourced
from Crost and Felter (2020)

To elaborate conditions where ’state-capacity’ may move in line with or opposite of ’state-

prize’ mechanism, I employed the stylized framework from (Crost and Felter, 2020). Figure

2 illustrates the theoretical relationship between insurgent capability (relative to state forces)

and violent contestation, as derived from contest success function models. The core-idea

13

of these contest-success models is that suppose there is an increase in the economic value

of a resource, if this prize is situated in a region where the government has much higher
capacity, the probability of contestation reduces as insurgents are unable to challenge or

engage in rent-seeking activities on these resources. The same is true if the prize is situated in
a region where insurgence capacity is much higher than the government. In rebel-dominated

territories where insurgent forces maintain military supremacy, armed groups can effectively

monopolize resource rents, thereby eliminating government incentives to challenge their

control due to the prohibitive costs of intervention.13 More importantly, state-capacity in
this line of argument predicts that rising economic value of commodities may exacerbate

violent insurrections in areas where conflicting groups (e.g., state and rebels) are evenly

matched in terms of might (Crost and Felter, 2020). Figure 2 demonstrates that reduced

conflict violence may reflect either: (1) weakening insurgent capacity in areas of initial

rebel weakness (A → A′), or (2) strengthening insurgent dominance in already established

strongholds (B → B ′).

3.3 Mechanisms: Coconut and Internal Conflict

The relationship between coconut production and internal conflict is shaped by complex

interactions between local farmers/firms, rebel groups, and state authorities. Anecdotal

evidence indicates that coconut producers/exporters often find themselves entangled with

armed non-state actors resisting government attempts to control or exploit coconut resources.

This resistance can take the form of cooperation, coercion, or extortion. A large stark of

coconut-conflict anecdotes suggests state resistance (i.e., insurrection) often occurs as a

results of cooperation between coconut-farmers and armed insurgent groups. However, it can-

not be dismissed that recent evidence (not necessarily related to coconut) have documented

that insurgent groups frequently finance their operations by levying “revolutionary taxes”

or extortion fees on various economic activities, including agriculture, telecommunications,

and mining (Berman et al., 2017). In coconut-producing regions, these groups may target

coconut farmers and exporters to extract resource rents necessary for sustaining insurgencies.

For example, the New People’s Army (NPA) in the Philippines is notorious for imposing

such taxes on businesses and agricultural exporters, threatening destruction of property and

disruption of operations to enforce compliance (Crost and Felter, 2020; Colina, 2018).

13 Looking at this same situation from the lens of state-price mechanism suggest rebels are able to fund and

expand their activities outside the areas under their control—violence goes up then (Berman et al., 2017).

14

Building on the conceptual foundation of (Crost and Felter, 2020), this study adopts the

extortion and opportunity cost channel as its primary explanatory mechanism. Two potential

sources can lead to this extortion channel; direct extortion channel which aligns with classical

theoretical formulations of the rapacity effect, wherein localized economic endowments—

coconut cultivation—create incentives for rent—seeking behaviour and violent appropriation;

and an indirect extortion channel closely linked to the contest-success model illustrated

earlier. The direct extortion channel operates through a rent-capture mechanism: rising

commodity values increase the economic returns to controlling production areas, thereby

incentivizing greater investment in conflict activities. In the context of coconut–conflict

relation, this manifests in two non-exclusive pathways: (1) state-led extraction – if the
state monopolizes rents from coconut production/exportation—often at the expense of

smallholders, plantations, or exporters—it may provoke evasion strategies. Producers may

circumvent formal markets by smuggling through rebel networks or, in some instances, align

with anti-state insurgents by directly financing their strategic operations to undercut the

government; or (2) insurgent rent-seeking – insurgent groups may impose revolutionary
taxes on coconut cultivation and trade. In this case producers/local cooperation/exporters

faces a trilemma (i.e., they choose to either comply, resist through self-defence, or seek state

protection). Regardless of the choice of coconut producers/exporters, it is certain that this

will lead to escalating local violence (i.e. amongst non-state actors, state and insurgent actors,

or intensify counterinsurgency efforts). The indirect extortion channel can be explained in

lens of the contest-success game explained in section 3.2. The idea is that depending on the

initial capacity of the state or insurgent group, the boom in the value of resources can either

curtail or intensify local violence (refer to figure 2 for details).

Interestingly, three core aspects of coconut cultivation help enable this extortion mechanism.

First, as noted in accounts linking coconut to conflict, the global surge in demand for

coconut was met with various extractive strategies—initially by colonial powers and later

by post-independence governments—that contributed to the formation of extractive state

institutions, creating a persistent structural link. This implies weak institutional quality in

coconut producing economies. Second, the perennial nature of coconut cultivation makes it

easier for the state to impose extractive taxation and capture long-term rents. This is in line

with an assertion in (Gantier, 2020). Third, because coconut typically thrive in lowland and

coastal areas, it becomes highly susceptible to appropriation. These geographic features not

only increase exposure to state control but also enable looting and illicit trade, especially by

15

insurgent groups using accessible waterways for transport.

The relationship between coconut cultivation and internal conflict can also be understood

through the lens of the opportunity cost channel. Although coconut farming involves low

levels of mechanization and is generally labour-intensive, its establishment requires signifi-

cant fixed investment and a long maturation period—typically ranging from 3 to 10 years,

depending on the seed variety. This makes it less accessible to new entrants and expanding

farmland to capture often temporary market gains less attractive, potentially shifting the

focus away from labour intensity. Instead, the high initial costs make appropriation of exist-

ing plantations a more attractive option. As the opportunity cost of entering or expanding

coconut plantation rises, individuals may find greater incentive to appropriate rather than

invest, often by joining or forming insurgent groups. This, in turn, increases the risk of

internal conflict.

4 Coconut Endowment and Country Level Conflict

This section is dedicated to the presentation of the first-hand investigation of the relationship

between coconut endowment and cross-country conflict events. Central to this country-

level investigation is the availability of historical conflict data dating back to 1946, which

facilitates the establishment of an earlier link between coconut and conflict, hypothesized to

be primarily driven by the "global coconut demand" epoch suggested in qualitative studies.

The analysis is nevertheless confined to the period from 1961, aligning with the independence

era of many former European colonies in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and South

and Southeast Asia. This allows for the evaluation of coconut as a determinant of conflict

without the influence of colonial ties. The study draws upon data from 148 countries14,

providing a broad empirical foundation for the findings.

4.1 Data Sources and Description

4.1.1 Country-level Conflict Data

Conflict data is drawn from the UCDP-ACD dataset v24.1 (Gleditsch et al., 2002; Pettersson

and Eck, 2018). Throughout the analytical part of the study, the main conflict type discussed

is state-based intrastate violent events. UCDP defines this type of violence as a contestation

14 Table SA1 of the supplementary file presents the countries included in the study.

16

(with the use of arms) between two parties, where one is always the government and the

other always an organized non-governmental organization without the foreign governments

with troops to support either side of the conflict actors. Violent events are recorded in the

ACD dataset based on the PRIO-25 coding strategy where events are highlighted based on

battle-related deaths over a specific incompatibility15 within a year. Only violent incidents

resulting in 25 battle-related fatalities over an incompatibility in a year is recorded. The

UCDP-ACD data is preferable for the country-level analysis as it directly measures conflict

events at the national level, and covers an extended period. This research utilizes two specific

operational definitions of civil unrest from this coding system: (i) Civil Conflict Onset— which
is defined as the total number of distinct conflict onsets per country over the 1961–2017

period. Note, recurrent episodes of existing conflict are excluded from this measure and (ii)

Conflict Incidence—representing the proportion of years with active conflict per country over
the period 1961-2017.

4.1.2 Coconut Endowment data

The Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) v4 database, developed by the Food and Agriculture

Organization (FAO) is employed for the country-level analysis. This database provides

detailed assessments of land suitability assessment for approximately 120 different crops

globally based on a set of soil and climatic characteristics. The country-level version categorize

land (measured in km2) into five distinct suitability classifications based on yield potential:

(i) very suitable (80–100% yield potential (yp)), (ii) suitable (60–79% yield potential),

(iii) moderately suitable (40–59% yield potential), (iv) marginally suitable (20–39% yield

potential), and (v) unsuitable (< 20% yield potential). For the purpose of this study, it is

important that the measure of coconut suitability proxies historical conditions which GAEZ

offers a range of features which makes this possible. FAO’s agro-climatic model in some

sections explicitly omit factors that are easily manipulated by human intervention (e.g., the

model does not factor forest cover).

Following the seminal works of (Nunn and Qian, 2011; Iyigun, Nunn and Qian, 2017), I used

the low input crop suitability file (rain-fed in all phase and without chemical application).16

This arguably minimizes the potential confounding influence of agricultural technological

15 UCDP-ACD attributes incompatibility to the primary concern of the contestation; either concerns over

government or territory or both.

16 I used the historical version of the dataset (specifically, 1961-1990). The study differ from (Iyigun, Nunn

and Qian, 2017) as it employed an earlier version of the dataset.
Results remains economically and statistically consistent when later versions of the data is employed.

17

changes and irrigation intensity. Suitability classification in the study is classified based on

the land having at least 40% yield potential for coconut. A country’s land suitability for

coconut production is computed as:

Coconut Area = ωi

N
(cid:88)

i=1

SCi

where ωi represents the weights of the suitability class (SC) included in the computation.17
The details of the distribution of coconut suitability across countries can be found in the

Appendix Figure A1.

The study employs land suitability—rather than observed production or export volumes—as

a measure of a country’s endowment in coconut commodities. A natural question arises as to

why this approach is adopted. The primary justification lies in addressing the pervasive data

limitations surrounding coconut-related statistics. Reliable data on coconut production and

trade are scarce, and even when available, as noted by Quirke and Longmore (2007), they

are often merely indicative and lack definitive accuracy.

Beyond mitigating data constraints, the use of land suitability offers two key analytical

advantages, (i) disentangling production from domestic consumption: In many economies
where coconut is intensively cultivated, domestic consumption accounts for a significant

share of output, making precise production estimates inherently challenging. Land suitability

provides a more stable metric of underlying agricultural potential as it does not depend on

local consumption patterns and (ii) exogeneity to conflict dynamics: Given the biogeophys-
ical basis of land suitability measurements, this variable is less likely to be endogenously

influenced by conflict events, thereby strengthening the causal inference in the analysis.

The next question has to do with how reasonable coconut potential—measured by land

suitability—is as proxy for coconut endowment. I conducted a formal check for this by

investigating the conditional correlation between land suitability and coconut production.

Data on coconut production comes from the Food and Agriculture (FAO’s) production statistics.

Figure 3 presents the conditional association between the suitability measure and coconut

production. It demonstrate a strong positive association between the two measures. The

17 The corresponding weights are 0.9, 0.7 and 0.5 for the land area (km2) considered as very suitable, suitable

and moderately suitable for coconut cultivation; respectively.
In robustness I included the marginally suitable land class with a weight of 0.3 in the computation of land
area suitable for coconut in a given country. The estimated coefficient remained very similar to the baseline
estimate.

18

Figure 3. Coconut Suitability and Coconut Production — Conditional on a set of geographic controls,
continent and legal origin FE.

beta coefficient is 0.29 and statistically significant at the 1% level.

4.1.3 Baseline Control Variables

The extant literature has identified a plethora of factors that contribute to contemporary

civil unrest. Building upon this empirical foundation, the analysis incorporates a battery

of baseline control variables to mitigate potential confounding in the relationship between

coconut endowments and insurgent activity. Below, I delineate these covariates and their

theoretical relevance.

Geographic factors: To minimize the risk of documenting spurious associations between
coconut and conflict—possibly due to lurking influence of geographic factors which has been

shown to induce conflict (Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Michalopoulos, 2012; Carter, Shaver and

Wright, 2019)—the study incorporated a set of geographic controls. This is quite important

especially given the nature of suitability data which are composed based on climatic and

land characteristics (e.g., temperature, humidity, soil pH, slope, and rainfall), which may

independently affect conflict risk. For instance terrain ruggedness may co-determine conflict

risk by shaping rebel hideouts and coconut (the commodity is known to thrive in lowland

areas). Similarly, proximity to waterways and island nations may favor coconut growth, yet

conflict in these areas could arise for reasons unrelated to the commodity. Following evidence

from (Arbatlı et al., 2020; Ashraf and Galor, 2013a), omitting these geographic factors could
bias the results. Thus, the analysis explicitly accounts for them to isolate the true relationship

19

between coconut endowments and conflict. However, it is noteworthy that here the study is

very conservative in controlling for potential geographic confounders. Reason being that in

as much as geography can confound the established relationship, it can lead to attenuation

bias—due to high correlation of the suitability data and these geographic variables. With

this in mind, the study controlled for the potential influence of terrain ruggedness, elevation,

distance to nearest waterways, and an indicator variable for island nation.

Natural Resource: Point-source natural resources (e.g., oil, minerals) are often linked to
violent due to rent-seeking behavior and weakened institutions (Ross, 2015). The consensus

on the nexus between primary commodities and internal conflict is that these events are used

to foster short-term economic interests (Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Garfinkel and Skaperdas,

2007; Ross, 2004). The meta-analysis by (Blair, Christensen and Rudkin, 2021) concludes

that agricultural commodities (often labor-intensive) and point-source resources (capital-

intensive) may move in the same direction in what is known as rapacity effect.18 On other

hand, these commodities may exert opposing influence on conflict risk.19 The importance of

controlling for the potential confounding effects of competing resources lies in the fact that,

if the relationship between commodities (e.g., coconuts) and conflict is driven by the former

hypothesis, which aligns with the dynamics of point-source resources (e.g., oil or minerals),

failing to account for this could lead to biased results. This is particularly relevant given that

many of these resources often share geographic overlap with agricultural zones (Niu et al.,

2023). The baseline specifications thus includes an indicator for the presence of oil or gas

reserves to capture the role of other competing resources.

Historical institutional factors: There is a growing consensus in the development economics
literature on colonial imprints on modern institutions (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson,

2001; Wucherpfennig, Hunziker and Cederman, 2016). The legacy of colonial rule and the

identity of former colonizers may significantly influence the modern political and economic

institutions of a nation, thus confounding the relationship between coconut endowments

and the risk of violent event. This is particularly important for the following reasons; (i)

the climatic stability underlying coconut suitability measures creates a natural overlap with

18 This term implies that increase in the value of the commodity increases competition for controlling the

resource, thereby, raising conflict risks in regions that produce the commodity intensively.

19 This can be attributed to the so called opportunity cost effect, wherein an increase in the value of labor-
intensive (e.g. agriculture) commodity raises the opportunity cost of engaging in violent activities. Conversely,
increase in the value of point source resources (capital-intensive) reduce the opportunity cost of conflict.
For instance, the potential returns from illicit appropriation rise—such as in the case of oil theft—without
a corresponding increase in legal employment opportunities (e.g. hiring maybe based on contracts—where
wages may be less flexible to market conditions), thus making conflict more economically appealing.

20

colonial economic geography. As established by Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001),

European colonizers systematically developed extractive institutions in regions with high

resource potential and high mortality rates; (ii) possibility of bias from colonial labor and

land tenure systems (Austin, 2008) and (iii) its imprint on persistent local elite capture (Iyer,

2010). Thus, the study account for historical prevalence of colonial rule (i.e. the presence

of either British or French colonizer and any major colonial prowess indicator) and a legal

origin indicator to account for persistent juridical traditions (La Porta et al., 2017).

4.2 Estimating Equation and Empirical Results

This section of the study delves into the empirical strategy used in the country-level analysis

of coconut—conflict relations. The present analysis employs a cross-country study design to

elucidate coconut as a determinant of cross-national variation in the risk of civil unrest and

armed insurrection. The baseline specification, estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS),

takes the following form:

Yi = β0 + β1CSi + β ′

2GEOi + β3P SRi + β ′

4HIN Si + εi

(1)

where; Yi represents the civil conflict (onset or incidence) level in country i; CSi is the (log
transformed) area of country i’s arable land suitable for coconut cultivation; GEOi, P SRi,
and HIN Si are the corresponding vectors of control variables for geographical characteristics
(including continent dummies), the discovery of point source resources, and historical institu-

tional structure; and εi is the country-specific idiosyncratic disturbance term. The parameter
of interest is β1, which represents the expected adverse impact of coconut cultivation on
state-based intrastate armed insurgencies.

The summary of the results from the estimation equation 1 is presented in Table 1. The

outcome variable in Columns (1-4) is the average civil conflict incidence and that of Columns

(5-8) is the average number of new civil conflict outbreak from 1961-2017. According to the

unconditional relationship, the likelihood of civil conflict has been positively impacted by

coconut endowment in both an economic and statistically meaningful way. Specifically, a

movement from Ethiopia (10th percentile, minimum non-zero) to Indonesia (90th percentile)

of the cross-country distribution of coconut suitability is related to about 40.1% standard

deviation (SD) increase in the average probability of civil conflict at the 5% level.20.

20 Bearing in mind the mean of the sample dependent variable is 0.175(0.252), assessment on the magnitude

21

Table 1. The Impact of Coconut on Civil Conflict Incidence across Countries - The Baseline Results

Ln[1 + coconut area]

Natural resource control
Geographic controls
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

10th–90th % move in coconut suitability

Observations
Adjusted R2

PRIO25 Civil Conflict

(1)

Avg. Incidence
(3)
(2)

(4)

(5)

Freq. Onset
(7)
(6)

(8)

0.011**
(0.0052)

0.012**
(0.0051)

0.013**
(0.0052)

0.013**
(0.0055)

0.046
(0.031)

0.051
(0.032)

0.058*
(0.032)

0.065*
(0.034)

No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No

No
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No

No
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.10**
(0.048)
148
0.026

0.11**
(0.048)
148
0.066

0.12**
(0.048)
148
0.051

0.12**
(0.052)
148
0.25

0.42
(0.29)
148
0.013

0.48
(0.30)
148
0.033

0.54*
(0.30)
148
0.057

0.61*
(0.32)
148
0.24

Note: The unit of observation is state-based conflict in a given territory. The Continent FEs include Africa, Europe, Asia,
Oceania, and the Americas,. The set of legal origin dummies includes two indicators for British and French legal origins, and
the set of colonial history dummies includes three indicators for experience as a colony of the U.K., France, and any other
major colonizing power.
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

Column 2 considers the potential influence of a nation’s resource endowment; yet, the coeffi-

cient of interest remains both qualitatively and statistically significant. Column 3 includes

an additional array of geographic covariates. I specifically accounted terrain ruggedness,

elevation proximity to the nearest waterways, and an indicator for island nations. Column

(4) introduces the full suite of baseline controls—natural resource endowment, geographic

features, institutional history, and continent fixed effects. Under this full specification, mov-

ing from the 10th to the 90th percentile of coconut suitability corresponds to a 70.1% SD

increase in the likelihood of ongoing civil conflict. The findings from column (5-8) are

structured similarly to that of column (1-4). The findings from column 5 portray that the

relationship between coconut endowment and the onset of state-based conflict is positive not

statistically different from zero. However, when geographical and full baseline controls are

incorporated (Columns 7 and 8), the relationship becomes statistically significant. Figure 4

visually illustrates the conditional relationship between coconut suitability and conflict. Panel

(a) includes continent fixed effects, while panel (b) further adjusts for geographic covariates.

In both cases, the estimated effects lie within the 95% confidence interval, consistent with

the regression results in Table 1.

Endogenous coconut suitability. The preceding results are, at best, correlational. As
with any empirical study, I cannot completely rule out the potential endogeneity of coconut

suitability and conflict. The most obvious concern is the reverse causation from violent

of the coefficient is computed as; β∗

1 =

ˆβ1
SD ¯y

22

(a) Coconut suitability and civil conflict incidence -
conditional on continental dummies

(b) Coconut suitability and civil conflict incidence -
conditional on geographic factors and continental dum-
mies

Figure 4. Note: Visual depiction of coconut—conflict relation

conflict to the destruction of land area that may be suitable for agricultural activity.21 Hence,

direction of this potential bias is likely negative. Thus, the potential bias from reverse

causation is negative. A simple falsification test by regressing coconut suitability on conflict

revealed a positive association, suggesting that the reverse causation is unlikely.

Regardless, endogeneity issues may still persist from instances such as measurement errors.

The satellite-derived agro-ecological data (here GAEZ), while globally consistent, may still

suffer from systematic measurement error due to cloud cover, outdated input layers, or

algorithmic smoothing, especially in regions with limited data access. Another potential

issue is that the relationship between coconut suitability and conflict may be shaped by a

multitude of factors that are not fully captured in the model, especially in cross-country

data where institutional, cultural, and historical differences can be profound. For instance,

pre-existing ethnic or political tensions could all significantly influence both the development

of coconut cultivation and the risk of conflict. To make progress, there is the need to isolate

some variation in coconut endowment (i.e., the area of land with the potential of cultivating

coconut), that is influenced by factors unrelated to the dynamics between coconut cultivation

and conflict risk, ensuring that this variation is orthogonal to unobserved specific traits tied

to conflict actors.

To this end, I leverage on the GAEZ land classification into agro-ecological zones as an

21 A striking example of this is the Gaza conflict, where, according to the United Nations Satellite Centre
“Damage Assessment in the Gaza Strip” report, approximately 57% of Gaza’s agricultural land has been severely
degraded as a result of ongoing violence.

23

AGOBDIBENBFABWACAFCIVCMRCOGDZAEGYERIETHGABGHAGINGMBGNBGNQKENLBRLBYLSOMARMDGMLIMOZMRTMWINAMNERNGARWASDNSENSLESOMTCDTGOTUNTZAUGAZAFZARZMBZWEALBAUTBELBGRBIHBLRCHECZEDEUDNKESPESTFINFRAGBRGRCHRVHUNIRLITALTULUXLVAMDAMKDNLDNORPOLPRTROMRUSSVKSVNSWEUKRAFGAREARMAZEBGDBTNCHNGEOIDNINDIRNIRQISRJORJPNKAZKGZKHMKORKWTLAOLBNLKAMMRMNGMYSNPLOMNPAKPHLPRKQATSAUSYRTHATJKTKMTURUZBVNMYEMAUSNZLPNGARGBLZBOLBRACANCHLCOLCRICUBDOMECUGTMGUYHNDHTIMEXNICPANPERPRYSLVURYUSAVEN-.20.2.4.6.8-10-50510AfricaEuropeAsiaOceaniaAmericas(Residual)Avg. conﬂict incidence (1961-2017)(Residual)Ln(1 + Coconut Area)AGOBDIBENBFABWACAFCIVCMRCOGDZAEGYERIETHGABGHAGINGMBGNBGNQKENLBRLBYLSOMARMDGMLIMOZMRTMWINAMNERNGARWASDNSENSLESOMTCDTGOTUNTZAUGAZAFZARZMBZWEALBAUTBELBGRBIHBLRCHECZEDEUDNKESPESTFINFRAGBRGRCHRVHUNIRLITALTULUXLVAMDAMKDNLDNORPOLPRTROMRUSSVKSVNSWEUKRAFGAREARMAZEBGDBTNCHNGEOIDNINDIRNIRQISRJORJPNKAZKGZKHMKORKWTLAOLBNLKAMMRMNGMYSNPLOMNPAKPHLPRKQATSAUSYRTHATJKTKMTURUZBVNMYEMAUSNZLPNGARGBLZBOLBRACANCHLCOLCRICUBDOMECUGTMGUYHNDHTIMEXNICPANPERPRYSLVURYUSAVEN-.50.51-10-50510AfricaEuropeAsiaOceaniaAmericas(Residual)Avg. conﬂict incidence (1961-2017)(Residual)Ln(1 + Coconut Area)instrument for land suitability for coconut. Specifically, I used the fraction of a country’s

cropland that is classified as sub-humid tropical lowland as a source of exogenous variation

in coconut suitability (section A-2 of the Appendix thoroughly discuss this approach). Table

2 presents the findings on the causal investigation of the effect of coconut endowment on

civil conflict via the 2SLS approach. Columns 1 and 4 replicates the Columns 4 and 8 of

Table 1. The findings from Column 2 suggest even stronger effect of coconut suitability on

ongoing civil conflict risk. On average, a 10% increase in coconut suitable land area raises

the risk of ongoing civil armed conflict by approximately 0.22 pp. While the coefficient ˆβ1 in
Column 2 represents a causal estimate, it may still be subject to a critical limitation. Although

the instrument—the proportion of a country’s arable land classified as sub-humid tropical

lowland—is conceptually sound, its validity could be compromised if it correlates with

unobserved determinants of the outcome through the suitability of other crops cultivated in

these regions. To address this concern, Column 3 incorporates controls for the suitability of

cropland for key alternative commodities that thrive in sub-humid tropical lowland zones,

namely banana, sweet potatoes, wetland rice, oil palm, and rubber plantations. Reassuringly,

the causal effect remained similar (even stronger than in column 2). On the other hand, the

investigation of coconut endowment as a potential (causal) predictor of civil conflict onset

affirm the suspicion that the already established somewhat statistical association in Table 1

is not causal (as presented in columns (5-6)) of Table 2).

4.3 Sensitivity Analysis

This sub-layer of the cross-country analysis is dedicated to the examination of the extent to

which the results remain resilient to a large battery of sensitivity checks.

4.3.1 Alternative Definition of Coconut endowment and cutoffs

The tests begins by subjecting the documented results to alternative definitions and thresholds

of coconut endowment measure. While suitability remains a theoretically appealing measure

due to its exogeneity and relative immutability over time, it is still crucial to verify whether

the documented relationship holds when employing alternative conceptualizations of coconut

endowment. The study thus introduce two alternative measures—potential production and

potential yield. These two definitions complements the documented baseline results in the

following way;

Potential production reflects not only the land area suitable for coconut cultivation but

24

Table 2. The Impact of Coconut on Civil Conflict Incidence across Countries - The Baseline Results

Ln[1 + coconut area]

Natural resource control
Geographic controls
Suitability of related commodities
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

10th–90th % move in coconut suitability

Observations
Adjusted R2

FIRST STAGE RESULTS

Sub-humid tropics cropland share

First-stage F statistic

Civil Conflict

Avg. Incidence
(2)

(1)

(3)

(4)

Freq. Onset
(5)

(6)

0.013**
(0.0055)

0.023** 0.028**
(0.012)
(0.011)

0.065*
(0.034)

0.034
(0.060)

0.0097
(0.066)

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.052)
148
0.25

0.21**
(0.10)
148

0.26**
(0.11)
148

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.61*
(0.32)
148
0.24

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.32
(0.56)
148

0.091
(0.62)
148

12.5*** 12.5***
(1.48)
(1.48)
37.4
42.7

12.5*** 12.5***
(1.48)
(1.48)
37.4
42.7

Note: The unit of observation is state-based conflict in a given year. The Continent FEs include Africa,
Europe, Asia, Oceania, and the Americas,. The set of legal origin dummies includes two indicators for
British and French legal origins, and the set of colonial history dummies includes three indicators for
experience as a colony of the U.K., France, and any other major colonizing power. The instrumental
variable: Sub-Humid Tropics Cropland Share is the fraction of cropland in sub-humid tropical lowland
area.
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
hypothesis tests

also incorporates projections of attainable output per unit of land under specific agronomic

conditions, thereby accounting for variations in agricultural productivity.22 On the other

hand, potential yield is a measure of agronomic productivity on a per-hectare. Hence reflects

the intensity rather than the extensiveness of coconut cultivation opportunities. In addition,

the analysis will also consider varying suitability and productivity thresholds. In doing so the

study assess whether the central findings—are not merely artifacts of the specific measure of

coconut endowment employed.23

Reassuringly, the estimates across specifications remains stable to the choice of coconut

measure and thresholds. The coefficient is robust within the range [0.013-0.019] and

22 In many ways it represents a more direct proxy of the value or rents potentially extractable from coconut

cultivation.

23 Varying the threshold also ensures that the results are not unduly influenced by technological advancements,
such as the development of high-yield coconut varieties. The 20% cutoff means examining land that can
produce at least 20 percent of its potential under low-input conditions, which represents the lowest threshold
that can be reasonably applied.

25

Table 3. Robustness to Alternative Use of Coconut Endowment Definition and Cut-offs

Low input

Low input intensity
intensity & 40% intensity & 40% intensity & 40% intensity & 20% intensity & 20% intensity & 20% & Highest occurring
yield in spatial unit
suitability cutoff production cutoff

suitability cutoff production cutoff

yield cutoff

yield cutoff

Low input

Low input

Low input

Low input

Low input

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Dependent variable:
Ln[1 + coconut]

0.013**
(0.0059)

0.018**
(0.0082)

0.016**
(0.0069)

0.013**
(0.0059)

0.019**
(0.0085)

0.015**
(0.0071)

0.016**
(0.0074)

Avg. Civil Conflict Incidence (1961–2017)

Baseline Controls
Suitability of related commodities
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

10th–90th % move in coconut measure

Observations
Adjusted R2

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.055)
148
0.34

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.13**
(0.058)
148
0.34

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.054)
148
0.35

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.13**
(0.055)
148
0.34

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.13**
(0.060)
148
0.35

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.056)
148
0.34

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.054)
148
0.34

Note:
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

significant at the 5% level. Moreover, graphical illustrations in Figure 5 further strengthen

the interpretation of these results. The scatter plots depicting various definitions of coconut

endowment consistently reveal a clear, positive slope. Additionally, the distribution of data

points around the regression line suggests that the relationship is not driven solely by outlier

countries or specific geographic regions, but rather reflects a broad, generalizable pattern.

(a) Suitability (y ≥ 0.4 · Ymax)

(b) Production (y ≥ 0.4 · Ymax)

(c) Yield (y ≥ 0.4 · Ymax)

(d) Suitability (y ≥ 0.2 · Ymax)

(e) Production (y ≥ 0.2 · Ymax)

(f ) Yield (y ≥ 0.2 · Ymax)

Figure 5. Sensitivity of coconut—conflict relationship to alternative definition of coconut endowment.
Note: figure shows the cross country relationship between coconut endowment and civil conflict from
Table 3.

26

4.3.2 Coconut and Historical Conflict

The various case studies and qualitative narratives surrounding coconut and conflict suggest

that the global surge in demand for coconut, particularly from the mid-19th to early 20th

century, transformed what was once a modest agricultural commodity into a highly profitable

cash crop. This shift led to greater market dependence, which, in turn, intensified the

economic value of coconut cultivation (Cerepak, 2019). A falsification test is conducted

to validate this hypothesis by examining the relationship between coconut suitability and

historical conflict during periods before the surge in global demand for coconut (1400-1799).

The logic is that before the crop gained economic importance, market pressures and the

potential for conflict over coconut-related resources were minimal, and hence, no significant

relationship should exist.

Table 4. Placebo Test on Historical Conflict

Dependent vars.

Ln[1 + coconut]

Baseline Controls
Suitability of related commodities
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

Number of conflict Number of conflict Number of conflict Number of conflict Number of conflict
(1600-1699)

(1400-1499)

(1500-1599)

(1400-1799)

(1700-1799)

(1)

0.087
(0.32)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
148
0.26

(2)

−0.011
(0.36)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
148
0.26

(3)

0.16
(0.19)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
148
0.18

(4)

0.064
(0.10)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
148
0.40

(5)

0.087
(0.32)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
148
0.26

Note:
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

Table 4 presents the results of this placebo test using historical conflict data from (Brecke,

1999). The coefficients for coconut suitability in the periods 1400-1499, 1500-1599, 1600-

1699, and 1700-1799 are all statistically insignificant, suggesting no systematic relationship

between coconut endowment and conflict during these earlier periods. This absence of a

relationship serves as strong evidence that the observed conflict relation are unlikely to be

spurious or coincidental but rather by the economic transformation of coconut cultivation in

later periods, arguably after World War II and during the era of rapid industrialization.

4.3.3 Other robustness checks

I performed a set of supplementary robustness checks, which are comprehensively detailed

in the appendix file. A comprehensive series of sensitivity analyses to confirm the robustness

of the established results. (i) I first checked the resilience of the results to a set of historical

determinants of growth (presented in Section A-3); (ii) I then checked whether the results

27

are not driven by historical agricultural timing (Section A-4); (iii) I also accounted for a

slew of deep-seated geographical and civilization legacies (Section A-5); (iv) and finally

I incorporate a set of diversity measures in hope to minimize the lurking effect of ethnic

divisions (Section A-6). Reassuringly, subjecting the documented results to these set of

additional controls did not significantly alter the results qualitatively and statistically.

5 Coconut Endowment and Cell Level Conflict

Shifting focus from cross-country comparisons, this section delve deeper into the relationship

between coconut endowment and conflict by examining its impact at a more granular level.

Specifically, I conducts a cell-level analysis to better capture and understand the localized

dynamics between coconut and conflict. The unit of analysis consists of cells measuring

0.5 × 0.5 degrees of latitude and longitude, which correspond to approximately 55 km by
55 km at the equator.24 However, due to limited data availability, this analysis cannot be
applied on a global scale.25 Therefore, this section of the study narrows its scope to a specific

region—Southeastern Asia and Oceania—where both the availability of relevant data and

the relationship between coconut endowment and conflict are better suited (See Figure SB1

of the supplementary file for the country division into standardized grid cells). This level

enables the investigation to distinguish the localized impact of coconut on conflict within

granular cells rather than across nations, hence enhancing the understanding of the intricate

interactions between coconut endowment and civil conflict risks.

5.1 Data Sources and Description

5.1.1 Cell-level Conflict Measure

The study used two large geospatial datasets on violent events: the Armed Conflict Location

and Event Dataset (ACLED) Raleigh and Dowd (2015) and the UCDP Geo-referenced Event

Dataset (UCDP-GED) Sundberg and Melander (2013). The primary conflict dataset used

for this section is UCDP-GED26, which provides spatially and temporally precise records

24 Note that in assigning border cells, the study assigns the country that represents the greatest share of their

area.

25 Dividing the global sample into 55 km cells reveals that only about 2.3% of the cells are classified as

coconut-suitable, with 13.5% when including Africa in the delineated study area.

26 There are two primary reason for the use of UCDP-GED as the main conflict data, (i) its clear definition of
what a state is and (ii) it covers conflicts from 1989 to date whereas ACLED data exists for the selected regions
for conflicts recorded from 2010.

28

of organized violence worldwide. The Uppsala collects the date, location (latitude and

longitude), and attributes of individual conflict events from verified reports such as news

agencies, non-governmental organizations, and historical archives from 1989 to date. A

key strength of this data is its systematic inclusion of events involving state or non-state

actors. To test the nature and type of state-based conflict at the local level, the study also

incorporated the ACLED database. ACLED tracks violent events (either political violence,

demonstration, and strategic development) in real time, recording geolocation data along

with details such as the involved actors, dates, and the nature of conflicts. The analysis

focus on events categorized by ACLED as "violent events", which includes battles, explosions,

violence against civilians, riots, protests27 and strategic development events.

While both datasets capture violent events, the study focuses primarily on civil conflict, which

is defined as internal conflict where one party is always the state without any support from

foreign forces. A distinction between the datasets arises in the way conflicts are categorized.

UCDP-GED offers a clear definition of state-based conflicts, whereas ACLED has a broader

and more flexible approach to categorizing violent events. For the purpose of this study,

only those events in ACLED where one actor is the state28 or its affiliates (such as political

militias) and the opposing actor is an organized or non-organized non-governmental body

were included. Another notable distinction between these two datasets is that, in contrast

to UCDP, which links a conflict to a battle-related death threshold and a "organized actor"

condition, ACLED does not impose any of these requirements. It is worth mentioning that all

efforts are undertaken to document state-based conflicts across the two datasets; however, as

noted by (McGuirk and Burke, 2020), UCDP’s methodology is especially adept at identifying

conflicts in which organized groups (one side being the state) compete for territorial control

or essential production resources—a vital dimension of civil conflict analysis.

As previously indicated, the unit of observation is at the cell level, thus I collapsed the data

to raster grids containing annual observations for cells at a 0.5◦ resolution (30 arc-minute).

The study incorporates only geolocalized conflict events with the finer precision level for the

analysis. Panels (a) and (c) of figure 6 presents the location of the various conflict events

included included in the study and panels (b) and (d) presents the frequencies of specific

27 Protests where violence (either lethal or non-lethal but forced suppression are included as violent events)
28 "ACLED defines a state expansively, encompassing any collective actor (e.g., military, police) performing
regime-specific governance functions over a territory. In contrast, UCDP employs a stricter criterion, defining a
’state’ as an internationally recognized governments or sovereign entities exercising unambiguous territorial
control and institutional authority."

29

events occurring in each 30 arc minutes.29 Out of 2,668 cells across 36 countries, the study

classifies ∼12.4% (from UCDP-GED) and ∼21.2% (from ACLED) as experiencing at least one

state-based violent event.

(a) Type of Violent Event (1989-2019)

(b) Number of Violent Event in Cell (1989-2019)

(c) Type of Violent Event (2010-2019)

(d) Number of Violent Event in Cell (2010-2019)

Figure 6. Distribution of State-Based Violent Events in Southeastern Asia and Oceania

5.1.2 Cell-level Coconut Measure

In the previous section of the paper (section 4), coconut endowment was defined only by

location. However, this section expands the definition to encompass both spatial and temporal

dimensions.

Spatial dimension of coconut measure: Consistent with prior methodology, the study
continues to rely on the GAEZ crop suitability dataset, which provides comprehensive cover-

age at both macro (country—level) and micro (spatially—disaggregated fine—resolution)

29 Note: Due to the presence of small islands and their spatial distributions so its not optimal to visualize the

full extent of the study area.

30

scales. GAEZ provides results of sub-national assessment of crop suitability in a regular

raster format of 5 arc-minute resolution covering the whole world, roughly 9 × 9 km cells

at the equator. FAO estimates the potential yield of each crop within individual grid cells

by integrating a suite of climatic variables (for details, refer to subsection 4.1.2) alongside

assumptions regarding crop management practices and input levels. Through subsequent

analytical processing, FAO derives constraint-free yield potentials30 for each crop, then ex-

presses the attainable production of each grid cell as a percentage of this benchmark value.

The suitability index ranges from 0 (unsuitable) to 10000 (very suitable). The study contin-

ues to rely on the rain-fed and low-input intensity GAEZ model, thereby isolating the effects

of inherent agro-ecological conditions from those influenced by agricultural intensification

or irrigation technologies.

Figure 7. Cell level Coconut Suitability

Given that the GAEZ 5 arc-minute resolutions are finer than the PRIO-grid cells employed in

the study, I measure coconut suitability at the cell level as the average suitability measure of

land within the cell. Figure 7 presents a visualization of the rasterization to 0.5◦ resolution of

coconut suitability. In the map, more suitable cells are indicated with a darker green shape.

For presenting purposes, the suitability metric is normalized to a range of 0 to 1 (by dividing

by 10000). Approximately 69.3% of the sampled area is classified as suitable for coconut

cultivation. The average value of coconut suitability measure in the sample is 0.23.

Temporal dimension of coconut measure: Undeniably, coconut is a quintessential tropical

30 Constraint-free implies an idealized estimate of crop yield potential under optimal conditions (including

thermal regime, moisture deficits, agro-climatic constraints, and soil/terrain limitations)

31

commodity, deeply ingrained in the socioeconomic and cultural fabric of producing nations.

While it’s revered as a staple commodity for local consumption—its economic benefits extends

far beyond subsistence. Coconut is a versatile industrial commodity—presently, every part

of the coconut plant is useful for something, even the husk: its derivatives—ranging from

virgin coconut oil (VCO) and biofuels to coir fibers and activated carbon—cater to growing

worldwide markets in cosmetics, renewable energy, and manufacturing. In sum, there is a

growing recognition of the commodity as a highly lucrative and thriving market. For instance,

according to market analysis by Research and Markets (2024), the global virgin coconut oil

(VCO) market expanded from $5.90 billion in 2023 to $6.19 billion in 2024. Projections

indicate sustained growth at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6.41%, with the

market expected to attain a valuation of $9.11 billion by 2030.

An important aspect of modeling the consequence of this lucrative cash-crop commodity

stems from a number of qualitative narratives that have started underpinning that farmers

are attracted to coconut cultivation due to the prospect of stable and long-lasting finan-

cial returns.31 As such, price of coconut-related products is considered for the temporal

dimension of coconut measure. To isolate the effects of global market forces from localized

determinants of civil unrest, this study employs international export prices of coconut-derived

commodities. As stressed throughout the study, data rarely exists. The study thereby adopts a

methodological framework akin to (Bazzi and Blattman, 2014), constructing a standardized

price index tailored to coconut. Section B-2 of the Appendix provides details for the price

index construction.32

5.2 Identification Strategy

To estimate the impact of coconut endowment on civil conflict, the study relies on the

methodology inspired by (Dube and Vargas, 2013; Berman et al., 2017; Girard et al., 2022).

It rests on leveraging exogenous variation in the economic value of coconut cultivation

induced by international price movements. The approach exploits exogenous variation in the

31 A qualitative assessment indicates that Nigeria may generate over N20 billion annually from coconut
derivatives, with a 10-hectare hybrid coconut farm potentially yielding between N16 million and N20 million
each year for the next 30 to 60 years (Tajusso, 2023).
According to a related report, the global coconut market is already worth $14 billion and is predicted to expand
by around 7% annually over the next several years (Agricultural Business, 2025).

32 The study contends that coconut producers, like cocoa growers, predominantly operate as smallholder
farmers. This structural characteristic inherently limits their bargaining power in global commodity markets,
rendering them price takers (Zakiah et al., 2021). This notion is rooted in the standard microeconomic model
of perfect competition, where atomistic producers may face perfectly elastic demand curves (Varian, 2014).

32

economic returns to coconut cultivation generated by international price shocks. The premise

is that global demand-driven price fluctuations for coconut derivatives create localized

rent-seeking opportunities, thereby exacerbating the likelihood of violence.33 The main

specification for this layer of the analysis is presented below:

Yc,i,t = α1 (CSc × lnP w

t ) + ϕ′Xc,t + FEc + FEi,t + εc,i,t.

(2)

Where Yct represents the violent conflict outcome variable for cell c in year t, operationalized
either as: (i) a binary indicator Yct ∈ {0, 1} where Yct = I(≥ 1 violent event/fatality occurs in
c during t), or (ii) an event/fatality count Yct ∈ Z≥0 of total violent (fatal) incidents per
cell-year. The later when expressed in terms of fatalities is the preferred measures intensity

level of a cell-year violent events.

The coefficient of primary interest, α1, captures the impact of the interaction between
). This parameter captures
coconut suitability (CSc) and the log international price (ln P w
t
how exogenous coconut price fluctuations affects the relationship between agro-ecological

potential for coconut cultivation and local violence patterns.34 The specification in equation 2

rests on two important assumptions; (i) orthogonality of external commodity shock (changes

in international price) to local conflict determinants and (ii) within-cell panel variation

derives from movements in global coconut prices, while controlling for a rich battery of

time-varying country-level unobservable (FEit) and cell-specific fixed effects (FEc).

FEc accounts for the main effect of coconut suitability as well as any local feature (cell-
level time invariant characteristics), such as remoteness, weather shocks or geographic

attributes. Importantly, the FEit absorbs the international coconut price shock and any
year-specific, country-specific, as well as any time-varying changes in each country (e.g.,

institutional/political changes and labour market regulations). The drawback of this approach

is that it could result in attenuation bias by controlling for important channels that explain

coconut—conflict relation. Across specifications standard errors are clustered at the cell level.

While this specification is preferred over conventional econometric approaches due to its

comprehensive fixed effects structure, potential bias may persist if unobserved cell-varying

factors that affect coconut—conflict relationship in non-trivial way. In this regards, some

33 A data-driven visual inspection lend credence to this assertion, thereby providing a sound theoretical

justification of the approach (See section B-1 appendix file for details).

34 Formally, α1 represents how violence risk changes (marginally) with the economic value of suitable land
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)Xct,FE

when there is global coconut price shocks:

∂Yct
∂(CSc×ln P w
t )

33

efforts are made to explicitly control for some key cell-varying characteristics Xct; including
gold mines (a competing land-use driver of violence) and drought exposure (standardized

precipitation index).

While the global coconut price index ln P w
t

is treated as exogenous under reasonable as-

sumptions, two limitations warrant discussion: (i) The price index is derived using export

price data from Indonesia and Philippines and hence may not fully reflect global price dy-

namics (especially if these two countries or the other countries in the sample systematically

experience some idiosyncratic supply shocks) and (ii) several sampled countries (e.g., India,

Sri Lanka, Indonesia) account for non-trivial share in global coconut export, hence could

potentially influence global prices of coconut—derivatives, consequently making this index

endogenous (i.e., Cov (ln P w

t , εct | Xct, FE) ̸= 0). I demonstrate that this potential concern
may have minimal effect on the documented results. This is done by testing the stability of

the results to exclusion of cells located in Indonesia and Philippines from the sample and

also test the robustness of the results to the exclusion of any country in the sample that falls

within the top 10 world producers in the sample.35 Nevertheless, readers should interpret

the results under the light of this caveat.

6 Empirical Results

This section presents the core empirical findings on the relationship between coconut culti-

vation and intrastate conflict. The examination begins with establishing the overall causal

relationship between coconut relationship between coconut and intrastate conflict events at

the subnational level. Following the UCDP classification framework, the study distinguish

between state-based and non-state conflict events. Subsequently, I characterize the specific-

nature of coconut-induced violence. Finally, we quantify the intensity of conflict attributable

to coconut suitability.

6.1 Baseline Results

Table 5 presents the summary of the results for external price shock for the most conservative

estimates at the cell-level as well as the full specification. The parsimonious specification

(Column 1), which accounts for unobserved spatial and temporal heterogeneity through cell

and country-year fixed effects, reveals that coconut-suitable regions experience a statistically

35 See (Berman et al., 2017) for a similar procedure in the context of mines and conflict.

34

significant increase in state-based conflict risk following international coconut price surges.

This positive association persists both in magnitude and significance when controlling for

additional geographic confounders including drought exposure and gold deposits in Column

2. Even when a more stringent PRIO-25-battle-deaths threshold is applied (Column 3), the

results remain stable, though with attenuated magnitude.

Table 5. COCONUT SUITABILITY AND VIOLENT CONFLICT: BASELINE - SUBNATIONAL LEVEL

Source

Dependent variable

Battle threshold

coconut suitable × ln price

t

drought

gold deposit × ln price

g

UCDP-GED Violent Event Yct = I(≥ 1)

State-Based Conflict

Crude

(1)

0.0140∗∗∗
(0.0050)

(2)

0.0196∗∗∗
(0.0054)

0.1076
(0.5795)

0.0211
(0.0180)

Prio-25

(3)

0.0067∗∗∗
(0.0026)

-0.0032
(0.2319)

0.0002
(0.0008)

(4)

0.0008
(0.0009)

Non-State Conflict

Crude

(5)

0.0002
(0.0014)

0.1502
(0.2529)

0.0007
(0.0012)

Prio-25

(6)

-0.0007
(0.0008)

0.3780∗∗
(0.1759)

0.0005
(0.0006)

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Dependent var. mean (sd) 0.021 (0.144) 0.019 (0.137) 0.002 (0.049) 0.002 (0.043) 0.002 (0.047) 0.001 (0.026)
Observations
R2

62,208
0.14164

82,181
0.34241

62,208
0.06816

62,208
0.32513

62,208
0.13367

82,181
0.11626

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Note: LPM estimations. The unit of analysis is the grid cell, with standard errors clustered at the cell level to account for
within-unit correlation. The dependent variable is a binary indicator of violent conflict occurrence, defined as at least one fatal
event per cell-year. Columns (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) utilize a threshold of ≥ 1 battle-related death, while Columns (3) and (6)
apply the PRIO-25 coding convention. The most parsimonious specification incorporates 2,651 cell fixed effects and 1,116
country × year fixed effects to control for unobserved spatial and temporal heterogeneity.
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

To assess the magnitude of the price variation, lets consider that in Column 2 we have a fully

coconut-suitable grid cell (CS=1): a 10% increase in the world price of coconut derivatives

corresponds to a 0.19pp increase in conflict probability (0.0196 × ln(1.10) ∼ 0.00187).

This represents about 8.9% relative increase from the average civil conflict incidence of

2.1% (0.00187/0.021 × 100). While this effect is substantial, it remains within a moderate

range, demonstrating that coconut cultivation has had a significant impact on escalating

conflict risk. However, I argue that this quantitative impact likely reflect lower-bound

estimates due to the use of coconut suitability rather than actual production data. This

measure likely includes areas that may be marginally productive or uncultivated, where

price shocks likely have weaker effects, resulting in a downward bias. In Columns (4-6), the

dependent variable is non-state-based conflict. We see that in all columns, the interaction

term (coconut suitability×lnP w
t

) shows economically negligible and statistically insignificant

coefficients, suggesting coconut endowment is unrelated to local non-state conflicts such as

communal violence.

35

Figure 8. Effect of coconut-related prices on state-based insurrection rate. Panel (a) and (b) visualize
the results of columns (2) and (3) of Table 5. Note: The predicted probabilities illustrate how a 10%
increase in the world price index of coconut affects the likelihood of state-based violence, stratified
by varying levels of suitability. The magnitude of the price fluctuation on violence risk is computed by
Risk Ratio = (Log(1.10) × α1 × CSc) × 100. The shaded areas show 95 percent confidence intervals.

In figure 8, I showed how price fluctuation (here 10% increase in world export price of

coconut) impacts the predicted risk of state-based internal conflict across different levels of

coconut suitability. The risk rises more sharply in areas with higher suitability, indicating

that price shocks have a greater effect on conflict likelihood where coconut is likely to be

cultivated intensively.

6.2 Coconut Suitability and Conflict Typology

Having established that an increase in the value of potential coconut cultivation induced by

increased global demand leads to increased risk of armed (state) insurgence, the study dive

deeper to establish what kind of conflict is induced by this agricultural richness. The findings

from this and subsequent section focus solely on state-based conflict. I start of this empirical

inquiry by leveraging on the rich set of violence attributes from the UCDP-GED and ACLED

database. The investigation begins with exploring the motives of the contestation as defined

by UCDP (i.e., whether conflict is over governance or territory).

6.2.1 Territorial vs. Governmental Conflict Dimensions

Table 6 shows the results of the investigation into whether the underlying contestation is

over territory or governance. The dependent variable in Columns (1-2) is territorial conflict.

Specifically, the interaction between coconut suitability and lnPt is positive and significant
(with marginal coefficients around 0.0186 and 0.0219; respectively). The findings suggest

36

that increased price of coconut-derivatives incites competition for coconut suitable lands,

creating strife between the state and organized groups.

Table 6. COCONUT SUITABILITY AND VIOLENT EVENT TYPE

Dependent variable

State-Based Violence

Territory

Government

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

coconut suitable × ln price

t

0.0186∗∗∗
(0.0041)

drought

gold deposit × ln price

g

0.0219∗∗∗
(0.0043)

0.0302
(0.5174)

0.0211
(0.0179)

-0.0045
(0.0029)

-0.0013
(0.0033)

0.0573
(0.3015)

0.0001
(0.0002)

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Dependent var. mean (sd) 0.012 (0.103) 0.010 (0.101) 0.012 (0.102) 0.009 (0.095)
Observations
R2

82,181
0.11626

62,208
0.31987

82,181
0.32996

62,208
0.13367

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level,
all for two-sided hypothesis tests

Columns (3) and (4) present findings on conflicts over governance. The key coefficient

of interest shows a negative but statistically insignificant relationship between coconut

cultivation and state-based conflict over governance. The negative direction, though not

statistically significant, offers subjective evidence that is often mentioned seldom in narratives.

While coconut cultivation is viewed as a potentially lucrative market, it is also subject to

unfavourable market conditions, which means that producers often rely on government

support to break even. Given the null result, I refrain from over-interpreting the negative

coefficient.

6.2.2 Coconut and Type of Violent Event

To further the investigation on the nature of coconut-induced intrastate civil conflict, I provide

further results using the ACLED data. The findings are provided in two layers. The first

layer considers a broader classification of conflict type by ACLED; demonstration, strategic,

and political violence.36 In Column 1 of Table 7, I aggregated the aforementioned three

classification of violent event. The findings suggest positive but null effect. The dependent

variable in Column 2 is violent demonstration (which is defined as a public gatherings (at least

3 persons) for violent protests or riots). The findings indicate a negative but again insignificant

36 In all these classifications, I solely focused on violent events. For instance, peaceful protest is excluded

from demonstration computation.

37

relation with coconut. This findings corroborate with prior evidence on contestation over

governance (null impact was documented).

Table 7. COCONUT SUITABILITY AND VIOLENT EVENT OBJECTIVE (2010-209)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

# of Violent
events

# of Violent

# of Violent

# of Violent

Demonstrations Political events Strategic Development

coconut suitable × ln price

t

0.4732
(0.3518)

-0.0206
(0.0290)

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Observations
R2

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.33675

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.56646

0.3961∗∗
(0.1806)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.26299

0.0011
(0.0359)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.25677

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
two-sided hypothesis tests

Moving forward, the results presented in Column 3 suggest that coconut-induces violent polit-

ical events (α1 = 0.39) at the 5% level.37 Finally, the examination of strategic developments—
including military engagements and territorial changes—shows no evidence of association

with coconut cultivation (Column 4). This pattern of results collectively suggests that

coconut—related conflicts are particularly likely to emerge as organized political violence,

while no significant relationship with other forms of conflict are documented.

Although the preceding results are insightful, they may overlook important nuances in the

types of conflict. To address this, the study further examines the nature of conflicts induced

by the potential benefit of coconut cultivation. Specifically, it investigates various conflict

at an even fine-grained classifications, including battles, explosions/remote violence, riots,

protests, and violence against civilians. The findings indicate no significant effects for most

of these subcategories, particularly riots, protests, and violence against civilians. However, at

the 10% significance level, the analysis reveals that coconut cultivation is associated with an

increase in battles and armed conflicts involving the use of explosions/remote violence (see

Table 8).

37 Political violence can be loosely defined as violent acts intended to achieve political objectives. It can
range from armed clashes, change in territories between organized groups and government, assassinations or
bombings.

38

Table 8. COCONUT SUITABILITY AND VIOLENT EVENT TYPE (2010-209)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Log[1 + # of Battle] Log[1 + # of Explosion Log[1 + # of Riots] Log[1 + # of Protests] Log[1 + # of Violence

and Remote Events]

against Civilians]

coconut suitable × ln price

t

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Observations
R2

0.0203∗
(0.0121)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.49116

0.0107∗
(0.0062)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.48374

-0.0062
(0.0056)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.32178

0.0017
(0.0060)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.44805

0.0178
(0.0141)

Yes
Yes

26,510
0.49061

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

6.3 Coconut and Conflict Intensity

The focus of the previous layers of the cell-level analysis was primarily focused on coconut

suitability and the occurrence of violent event, ignited by world price variations. This section

delves deeper into understanding how the economic value of coconut cultivation influences

the intensity of conflict, expressed in terms of intensity. The study examined the various types

of conflict actors classified by UCDP—such as civilians, government forces, and organized

groups. The aim of this analysis is to provide a nuanced perspective on how coconut-induced

violence manifests in terms of severity.

The findings from Figure 9 suggest that an increase in the price of coconut-derivatives is

related to an increase in the intensity of violent conflict in cells that suitable for cultivating

this commodity. Specifically, a 1% increase in world price is related to a 0.049% increase in

overall civil conflict intensity. Additionally, the findings highlight a significant heterogeneity

in the effects of coconut-induced conflict intensity across different types of actors. For

civilians, the effect is relatively modest, with a smaller increase in fatalities compared to

other actors. In contrast, government forces experience a more substantial rise in conflict

intensity. Organized groups show the most pronounced effect, suggesting that armed groups

are particularly sensitive to the economic incentives created by increased coconut prices,

potentially leading to more intense and frequent clashes with state forces.

6.4 Heterogeneous Effects: Quality of Institutions

So far, the study have carefully establish that indeed the rise in the value of coconut-derived

commodity drives internal civil unrest, particularly in regions that produce the commodity

intensely. In this subsection, I focus on heterogeneity analysis to address a key point raised

in section 3.3 and highlighted in recent research (e.g., (Bazzi and Blattman, 2014; Gantier,

39

Figure 9. Coconut Suitability and Conflict Intensity. Note: This figure shows the results of the cell-level
investigation of conflict intensity, expressed in terms of fatalities. It presents visual representation of
the estimates of α1 in columns (3-6) of Table B1 in the Appendix file.

2020)) — the role of institutional quality. This aspect is crucial for understanding the

coconut-conflict link, as it subjectively points to a channel of persistence.38 To operationalize

this, the study considered augmenting equation 2 to incorporate a triple interaction. The

idea is that FEi,t already captures this institutional quality effects, hence, its impact can only
be evaluated in this high-dimensional fixed effect specification through a triple interaction.

The adopted specification is presented below:

Yc,i,t = α1 (CSc × lnP w

t ) + α2 (CSc × lnP w

t × Z ′

i,t−1) + ϕ′Xc,t + FEc + FEi,t + εc,i,t. (3)

where (CSc × lnP w
quality components Z ′

t × Z ′

i,t−1

i,t−1) captures the triple interaction for the vector of institutional
. I differ from the study by Gantier (2020); Berman et al. (2017)

in that I employed a time-varying institutional quality measure whereas their study used a

time-invariant measure. The data on conflict and coconut suitability are measured at the

cell level and the data on institutional quality are only available at the country-level, as such

in all estimation of equation 3, the standard errors are clustered at the cell and country level.

A threat to this identification strategy is the possible reverse causation between political

violence and institutional quality measures. To address this, all components of institutional

38 Colonial legacies created extractive state institutions that weakened social cohesion and led to insurgencies.

40

quality index is lagged.39

Table 9. COCONUT SUITABILITY, INSTITUTIONAL QUALITY AND VIOLENT CONFLICT

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Violent Event Yct = I(≥ 1)

coconut suitable × ln price

t

× Government effectiveness

× Political stability & absence of violence

× Rule of law

× Regulatory quality

× Voice & accountability

Observations
R2

coconut suitable × ln price

t

× Government effectiveness

× Political stability & absence of violence

× Rule of law

× Regulatory quality

× Voice & accountability

Observations
R2

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Cell-varying controls
Multiple clustering

0.0196∗∗∗ 0.0295∗∗∗ 0.0268∗∗∗ 0.0252∗∗∗
(0.0059)
(0.0042)

(0.0081)

(0.0064)

0.0309∗∗∗
(0.0087)

0.0232∗∗∗
(0.0062)

0.0001
(0.0026)

-0.0057∗
(0.0025)

-0.0103
(0.0084)

-0.0061∗∗
(0.0019)

-0.0062∗∗∗
(0.0018)

62,208
0.32513

32,149
0.40473

32,149
0.40482

32,149
0.40485

32,149
0.40481

32,149
0.40481

Panel B: Log[1+ # of fatalities]

0.0492∗∗∗
(0.0143)

0.0759∗∗
(0.0274)

0.0692∗∗∗ 0.0625∗∗∗
(0.0154)
(0.0203)

0.0781∗∗
(0.0286)

0.0766∗∗
(0.0270)

-0.0023
(0.0060)

-0.0160
(0.0118)

-0.0340
(0.0241)

-0.0067∗∗∗
(0.0017)

62,208
0.30297

32,149
0.39234

32,149
0.39249

32,149
0.39260

32,149
0.39236

-0.0081∗∗
(0.0028)

32,149
0.39237

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Note: The analysis employs a twoway clustering of standard errors at both grid-cell and country levels across
all model specifications. The institutional controls, including rule of law, government effectiveness, regulatory
quality, voice & accountability and political stability are part of the World Governance Indicators of the World Bank
measuring a state’s institutional characteristics.
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

Table 9 presents the summary of the findings of including a triple interaction that captures

the differential effects of coconut endowment on intrastate civil strife for regions with strong

institutions. Similar to (Gantier, 2020), I construct a indicator variable for each measure if

39 The logic is that a conflict event today cannot logically influence the institutional quality measured yesterday.
A more serious concern is the presence of omitted variables that might influence both conflict and institutional
quality. However, these confounders are likely to exist only at the country level and are therefore accounted for
by the country-by-year fixed effects FEi,t.

41

the index is greater than its 75th percentile value. In Panel (A), the outcome variable is a

dummy variable indicating whether for a given cell-year at least one violent event occurred.

In column (1) the findings indicated a rather unexpected sign for government effectiveness

component of institutional quality. The relationship is however not different from 0. All

other measures of quality of institution showed expected economic sign and were significant

at either 5% to 10% level; except for rule of low.

In Panel (B) of Table 9, the outcome is turned to conflict intensity (proxied by battle-related

deaths in a given cell-year). Here, all components of institutional quality in the triple

interaction term were negatively related to conflict. However, only regulatory quality and

voice & accountability dimensions were statistically different from 0. Overall, the findings

suggest that regions with better institutional quality are less prone to being engaged in

resource-related civil insurgence. It is noteworthy the lack of significance in most cases is

likely due to the presence of FEi,t.

6.5 Heterogeneous Effects: Geographic Conduciveness

The notion of the triple interaction in equation 3 is also extended to test the geographic

conduciveness for coconut cultivation that ease the extortion channel discussed in section 3.3.

For each cell, I computed its average elevation over land (expressed in meters; ≥ 0) and the

average distance of a cell to the coast. For presentation purposes these variables were rescaled

to dividing by 1000. The idea here is that given that coconut is often cultivated in lowlands,

the probability of insurgent groups taking control over is less likely as state is able to easily

counterinsurgencies (i.e., limited geographic barrier for military mobilization). At the same

time, this also allows the government to effectively capture rents from coconut plantation.

Hence, the consequence on local violence depends very much on the interaction of these two

opposing ideas. Ultimately, this should mean that as elevation goes up, insurgent groups

are more able to contest with the state for control over rents of the resources as the uphill

terrain ruggedness may facilitate mobilization of non-state groups (capacity of insurgent

group goes up). Also, since coconut thrives along mostly coastal areas (as one proximate

waterways), it should increase the risk of appropriation and state-insurgent contestation.

Accessible waterways enhances the ease of transportation, hence, higher chance of illicit

trade and looting activities. Given this, one should expect a negative relationship of the triple

interaction with distance to coastline.

42

Table 10 presents the summary of the empirical findings of the aforementioned task. Across

all specifications, the expected signs of elevation and distance to coastline are confirmed,

however, the results are statistically insignificant. Overall the results suggest that coconut

suitable cells that are closer to the coastline and those that are low-lying areas do not react

differently from those that are in higher and perhaps rugged terrains as well as far away

from coastline to coconut price shocks. Again, the lack of statistical significant is likely due

to the presence of FEc making it difficult to detect heterogeneous effects of geographic
conduciveness.

Table 10. COCONUT SUITABILITY, GEOGRAPHIC CONDUCIVENESS AND VIOLENT CONFLICT

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Violent Event Yct = I(≥ 1)

Log[1+ # of fatalities]

coconut suitable × ln price

t

× Avg. elevation

× Avg. distance to coast

0.0196∗∗∗ 0.0182∗∗∗ 0.0198∗∗∗ 0.0185∗∗∗ 0.0492∗∗∗ 0.0474∗∗∗ 0.0524∗∗∗ 0.0500∗∗∗
(0.0170)
(0.0054)

(0.0060)

(0.0063)

(0.0066)

(0.0162)

(0.0141)

(0.0155)

0.0280
(0.0309)

0.0284
(0.0312)

-0.0100
(0.0253)

-0.0016
(0.0253)

0.0487
(0.0746)

0.0546
(0.0752)

-0.0685
(0.0629)

-0.0521
(0.0634)

Observations
R2

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Cell-varying controls

62,208
0.32513

60,960
0.32501

61,056
0.32531

60,624
0.32525

62,208
0.30297

60,960
0.30285

61,056
0.30304

60,624
0.30298

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Note:
*** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

6.6 Sensitivity Analysis

6.6.1 Addressing Potential Bias in World Price

Earlier sections of the analysis treated the world coconut price as exogenous, but this measure

may be subject to two potential sources of endogeneity. The first stems from the fact that not

all countries are price-takers. Especially considering that the export price index is computed

from Indonesia and Philippine benchmark and the fact that they are the dominant producers

of the commodity making them price-makers in that supply shocks will cause fluctuations

in world prices. For example, if conflict reduces coconut exports from either country at a

given demand, prices will increase due to anticipated scarcity, potentially leading to spurious

conclusions (particularly alarming if lagged (t−1) prices were used). In Table B2, I conducted

a formal test by excluding first, the two countries and subsequently omitted all cells that

belong to any countries in my sample that forms part of the 10% producers of the commodity.

43

Reassuringly, all results suggest that the documented results is stable.

Another source of concern is that the sample includes several small–island nations that

may be practising monoculture (here coconut cultivation) which may potentially lead to

vulnerability to price swings. This form of lack of diversification can heighten exposure to

coconut price volatility, potentially creating a spurious price variation-conflict link. In this

regard, I posit that the "F Eit" mitigates these concerns.

6.6.2 Addressing Spatial Correlation

With the use of high spatial resolution data, an important consideration to take into account

is spatial dependence since both conflict and coconut cultivation might be clustered in

space. This consideration becomes more apparent if this spatial clustering might span a

larger area than the cell (i.e., grid cells being 55km × 55km at the equator). In Table B3, I

estimated standard errors with a spatial HAC correction allowing for both cross-sectional

spatial correlation and location-specific serial correlation (Conley, 1999; Colella et al., 2019;

Hsiang, Meng and Cane, 2011). Given uncertainty about the precise timing of coconut

cultivation cycles, I adopt a conservative approach by assuming serial correlation may persist

indefinitely. While most coconut production occurs at small scales, I employ a generous

500km spatial radius to account for potential market spillover effects across regions. Evidently

from Table B3, I observe that the standard errors remain within a narrow range of values

slowly decaying as we increase the radius from 50 to 500km.

7 Conclusion

The study addresses a key gap in the literature on agricultural commodity shocks and internal

conflict, by providing a robust empirical evidence that—contrary to conventional wisdom

about agricultural commodity. Using cross-country data at the global scale and reinforcing

the findings with high resolution data at the subnational cells level confined to Southeastern

Asia and Oceania, the study documents a robust positive effect of coconut endowment and

civil unrest.

The findings challenge the conventional wisdom that labour-intensive agricultural commodi-

ties necessarily reduce violence through opportunity cost mechanisms and align with recent

studies that suggest that this widely accepted notion on agricultural commodity is not uni-

versal. Moreover, the findings provide layers of empirical scrutiny enhancing understanding

44

of pathways by which agricultural commodity (here coconut) may instead insight conflict.

Specifically, the inquiry revealed nuanced facts that conceptually describe how coconut’s

unique characteristics — such as its perennial nature, coastal clustering, and high taxation

potential — create conditions where rising economic value may translates into heightened

conflict risk.

When assessing the different possible heterogeneous effects, I find an arguably persistent

channel that the exploitative strategies adopted in colonial-era to capture the benefits

of the global boom in the demand for coconut have had its imprint in the formation of

post-independence governance and state authorities. This sheds new perspective on how

institutional quality may ease or serve as a barrier to rent extraction; popularly discussed

under rapacity effect in resource–conflict literature. The implications of the findings extend

beyond coconut—conflict case. The study underscore the need to reconsider how we model

the relationship between agricultural commodities and conflict. For instance, while traditional

opportunity cost arguments may hold for seasonal crops with quick returns, perennial crops

(such as coconut, lumber, cocoa) create different incentive structures that can paradoxically

make appropriation more attractive than production. The findings affirm and further recent

assertions (e.g., (Crost and Felter, 2020)) that may help explain why some agricultural booms

fail to deliver the pacifying effects predicted by standard economic models of conflict.

This study carries significant policy implications. First, it demonstrates that commodity

booms—often perceived as opportunities for economic growth in primary goods-producing

economies—may inadvertently exacerbate social unrest, thereby undermining societal stabil-

ity. Consequently, policymakers should implement targeted measures to mitigate resource-

driven conflicts, particularly during periods of elevated international prices for high-value

cash crops. Furthermore, the findings underscore how historical policy missteps can have

enduring adverse effects, reinforcing the need for evidence-based decision-making. Given

that recent research projects a surge in global coconut demand due to its potential as a

sustainable biofuel (Descals et al., 2023), a deeper understanding of past failures can guide

more effective and equitable resource management strategies.

45

APPENDIX FILE

A Country-Level Appendix

A-1 Country-level Coconut Suitability

Figure A1. The degree of coconut suitability across countries from the GAEZ v4 database from
1961-1990. Note: Darker blue shades indicate regions with higher area of arable land suitable for
coconut

A-2 Evaluation of the Instrumental Variable Framework

The identification of a valid instrument for coconut suitability is critical to isolating the

causal effect of coconut endowment on conflict risk. To this end, I propose leveraging the

fraction of a country’s cropland classified as sub-humid (humid) tropical lowland within the

Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) model as an instrument for coconut suitability. This

instrument is grounded in the biophysical realities of coconut cultivation and is plausibly

exogenous to conflict dynamics, thereby addressing concerns of endogeneity.

Coconut thrive in specific tropical environments characterized by a combination of warm

temperatures (68◦F to 86◦F), moderate to high rainfall with a distinct dry season, and well-

drained sandy soils (Parachute Kalpavriksha, 2025). These conditions closely match those

defining the sub-humid tropical lowland agro-ecological zone, which typically experiences

annual rainfall between 1,300 and 1,800 millimeters, a pronounced dry season lasting

A.1

Coconut Suitability036912Log area of a country's arable land suitable for coconut cultivationthree to five months, and soil types such as sandy loams that provide excellent drainage.

The physiological adaptations of coconut palms, including their salt tolerance, large seed

endosperm for seedling survival during dry spells, and deep rooting systems, reflect a long

evolutionary history in these environments. Consequently, the sub-humid and humid tropical

lowland AEZ captures the natural biophysical niche where coconut cultivation is most viable.

However, the tropical humid lowland AEZ arguably provide a broader range of suitability for

various crops. Hence I use the sub-humid tropical lowland AEZ. This narrow definition is

intended to minimize potential overlay with other crop suitability.

(a) Agro-Ecological Zone classes (1981–2010)

(b) Suitability Class (1981-2010)

Figure A2. Note: Case of Indonesia

Figure A2 presents a detailed illustration of the relationship between AEZ and coconut

suitability in Indonesia. In panel (a), the map of Indonesia’s AEZs reveals that a significant

portion of the country’s land is classified within the tropical lowland humid and sub-humid

zones. These zones are characterized by the specific climatic and soil conditions ideal for a

variety of tropical crops, including coconut. Panel (b) highlights a strong correspondence

between areas classified as sub-humid tropical lowland AEZ and regions identified as highly

suitable for coconut cultivation.

Abstracting away from this evidence, Table A1 provides the summary of the first stage

relationship between the chosen instrument and coconut suitability. Across specifications,

the coefficient on sub-humid tropical lowland share is both economically meaningful and

statistically significant at the 1% level. This relationship remains robust even after accounting

for geographic, resource wealth, suitability of related-crop suitability, and several fixed

effects. This lend credibility of instrumental variable framework, as its able to exploit enough

variations in coconut suitability.

A.2

Table A1. Coconut Suitability and Sub-Humid Tropical share - IV First Stage

Ln[1 + coconut area]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Sub-humid tropics cropland share 14.3*** 13.9*** 14.3*** 12.5*** 10.6***
(1.73)

(1.59)

(1.48)

(1.63)

(1.64)

Natural resource control
Geographic controls
Suitability of related commodities
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE
Observations
R-squared

No
No
No
No
No
No
148
0.396

No
Yes
No
No
No
No
148
0.444

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
148
0.447

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
148
0.604

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
148
0.692

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

A-3 Robustness to Historical Determinants of Economic Development

This section discusses Table A2 which presents additional evidence that the documented

results are stable against potential confounding influence of historical determinants of eco-

nomic development. Historical factors such as the type of political institutions, population

density, and urbanization rates have been argued to significantly influence long-term eco-

nomic trajectories (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2002; Easterly and Levine, 2003). By

including these additional historical determinants, the study ensure that the observed rela-

tionship abstract away from the potential confounding influence of economic and institutional

characteristics that may shape for instance modern land-use and labor legislation.

Table A2 incorporates a set of development controls: democracy, executive constraints, log of

population density in 1500 CE, and urbanization rates in 1500 CE. Democracy and executive

constraints serve as proxies for political institutions and the distribution of political power,

following the work of Robinson (2014); Marshall, Gurr and Jaggers (2017), who argue

that institutional factors significantly shape contemporary economic and social outcomes.

Population density and urbanization rates in 1500 CE control for pre-colonial economic

development and settlement patterns, factors highlighted by Nunn and Puga (2012); Ashraf

and Galor (2013b); Arbatlı et al. (2020) as crucial determinants of contemporary economic
prosperity and conflict likelihood. The addition of these controls in Table A2 does not

significantly alter the main results. The estimated coefficient on coconut suitability remains

A.3

positive and statistically significant across various specifications, indicating that the observed

relationship is independent of pre-colonial economic condition

Table A2. Coconut and Conflict: Robustness to Historical Development Outcomes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Avg. conflict incidence

0.013**
(0.0059)

0.014**
(0.0060)

0.014**
(0.0060)

0.013**
(0.0061)

0.018*
(0.0099)

0.021*
(0.011)

Ln[1 + coconut]

Baseline controls
Additional control

Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Democracy Executive

ln(Pop. den. 1500 CE) Urb. rate 1500 CE

Yes
None

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.057)
147
0.34

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.17*
(0.092)
81
0.44

Yes
All

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.19*
(0.099)
80
0.44

10th–90th % move in coconut suitability

Observations
Adjusted R2

0.12**
(0.055)
148
0.34

0.13**
(0.056)
145
0.34

0.13**
(0.056)
145
0.34

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

A-4 Robustness to Historical Agricultural Controls

The study included historical agricultural transition proxies, such as Neolithic transition

timing and subsistence modes in 1000 CE, to rule out the possibility that the established

results are only proxying for broader agrarian legacies (such as the evolution of tropical crops)

or the development of complex social structures induced by earlier agricultural/subsistence

practices. As presented in Table A3, coconut coefficient ( 0.013–0.015) across specifications

confirms that the link is not driven by ancient agricultural patterns.

A-5 Robustness to Deep Geographical and Civilizational Histories

Table A4 presents additional evidence to support the resilience of the baseline findings

against potentially confounding factors (i.e. deeper geographical and civilizational histories).

Specifically, I test the robustness of the baseline finding by incorporating state antiquity (cap-

turing early state formation), duration of human settlement (reflecting long-term habitation

patterns), proximity to pre-colonial technological frontiers, and measures of land suitability

inequality. The results show remarkable stability - the coconut suitability coefficient remains

statistically significant and in the 0.012-0.013 range across all specifications. This consistency

suggests the observed relationship is not simply an artifact of these deeper historical and

geographical factors. A notable findings that underscore the reliability of the documented

results is that whiles general land inequality (as measured by the land suitability gini) shows

A.4

Table A3. Coconut and Conflict: Robustness to Historical Agricultural Controls

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
OLS

(5)
OLS

Ln[1 + coconut]

Neolithic transition timing

0.0147*** 0.0134** 0.0147*** 0.0139**
(0.0056)
(0.0065)
0.0000
(0.0000)

(0.0054)

(0.0056)

Neolithic transition timing (ancestry adjusted)

Neolithic transition timing (1500 CE baseline)

Subsistence mode in 1000 CE

−0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

Baseline controls
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0120
(0.1716)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0130**
(0.0061)
0.0001*
(0.0000)
−0.0001*
(0.0000)
0.0000
(.)
−0.1522
(0.1758)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

10th–90th % move in coconut suitability

Observations
Adjusted R2

0.14***
(0.052)
146
0.34

0.13**
(0.051)
146
0.34

0.14***
(0.052)
146
0.34

0.13**
(0.061)
143
0.34

0.12**
(0.057)
141
0.35

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
hypothesis tests

an independent effect on conflict, it does not subsume the coconut-specific relationship. This

potentially reflects the localized cash-crop dynamics of coconut conflict relation.

A-6 Robustness to Diversity and Ethnic Confounders

The analysis presented in this section addresses a fundamental concern in the political

economy of conflict literature (Esteban, Mayoral and Ray, 2012): whether the observed

coconut-conflict relationship is not diluted by the potential influence of ethnic divisions. A

substantial body of work suggests ethnic diversity can independently predict conflict risk

through multiple channels: by creating coordination problems (Easterly and Levine, 1997),

exacerbating rent-seeking, or facilitating rebel recruitment (Fearon and Laitin, 2003). The

idea is that if ethnic divisions drove the results, then I expect the coefficient of coconut to be

substantially reduced or document null effect.

The results in Table A5 provide compelling evidence against this alternative explanation. The

coconut coefficient remains remarkably stable (0.0124-0.0143) and statistically significant

across all specification.

A.5

0.0129**
(0.0062)
0.0334
(0.0400)
0.0301
(0.0243)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.5823***
(0.1998)
−0.2914
(0.2438)
−0.0051
(0.0914)
0.1831
(0.2849)

Table A4. Coconut and Conflict: Robustness to Deep-Seated Geographical and Civilization Controls

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
OLS

(5)
OLS

Ln[1 + coconut]

Log index of state antiquity

Log duration of human settlement

Distance to regional frontier in 1500 CE

0.0133** 0.0129**
(0.0064)
(0.0059)
0.0355
(0.0367)

0.0122*
(0.0065)
0.0341
(0.0370)
0.0000
(.)

0.0123*
(0.0062)
0.0321
(0.0403)
0.0346
(0.0262)
−0.0000
(0.0000)

Land suitability Gini

Soil fertility

Standard deviation of elevation

Terrain roughness

Baseline controls
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

10th–90th % move in coconut suitability

Observations
Adjusted R2

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.12**
(0.055)
148
0.34

0.12**
(0.060)
134
0.34

0.11*
(0.061)
134
0.34

0.12**
(0.058)
134
0.34

0.12**
(0.058)
134
0.37

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
two-sided hypothesis tests

A.6

Table A5. Robustness to Diversity and Ethnic Covariates

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
OLS

(5)
OLS

(6)
OLS

Ln[1 + coconut]

Predicted genetic diversity

Predicted genetic diversity (ancestry adjusted)

Ethnic fractionalization

Ethnolinguistic polarization

Number of ethnic groups

Baseline controls
Legal origin
Colonial history
Continent FE

0.0133** 0.0138** 0.0143** 0.0124** 0.0132** 0.0130**
(0.0061)
(0.0059)

(0.0058)

(0.0060)

(0.0059)

(0.0058)
2.0591*
(1.2243)

0.5596
(0.9105)

0.0564
(0.0782)

−0.0438
(0.0776)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0024
(0.0072)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

10th–90th % move in coconut suitability

Observations
Adjusted R2

0.12**
(0.055)
148
0.34

0.13**
(0.054)
148
0.35

0.13**
(0.054)
148
0.34

0.12**
(0.056)
148
0.34

0.12**
(0.055)
148
0.34

0.12**
(0.057)
144
0.33

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
hypothesis tests

A.7

B Cell-Level Appendix

B-1 Preliminary Analysis—Visual Examination

The subnational-level analysis commence with an initial description of trends in intrastate

civil conflict in cells suitable and unsuitable for coconut cultivation. As depicted in Panel

(a) of Figure B1, "unsuitable for coconut" areas (shown in light-blue shade) show steady

increases in conflict events, particularly noticeable in the early years of the graph. By contrast,

"suitable for coconut" areas (in red shade) exhibit more volatile increases, especially around

the years 2000, 2005, and 2015. These findings indicate that, while conflict is escalating in

both areas, its evolution is very different.

(a) Yearly violent events, by coconut suitability

(b) Yearly coconut oil price

Figure B1. Note: Visual inspection of state-based conflict patterns between regions suitable and un-
suitable for coconut cultivation, alongside price of coconut-derivative fluctuations over the 1989–2019
period.

Having established this, I turned attention towards the potential role of price variation on

conflict dynamics. A systematic evaluation reveals that the post-2000 surge in coconut oil

prices coincides with increased conflict incidence in coconut-suitable regions. While this

correlation does not establish causation, the temporal alignment suggests a plausible linkage.

This may inherently depicts reality as the observed pattern aligns closely with qualitative

accounts positing that rising demand for coconut-derived commodities (here coconut oil)

may incentivize state actors to intensify control over valuable coconut-producing lands. Such

efforts—whether through militarized interventions, security deployments, or contested land

tenure policies—could create a (political) rift between the state and local populations or

B.1

rebel factions, thereby amplifying conflict risks.

B-2 Construction of International Price of Coconut

Given the paucity of data on world price of coconut and its derivatives, the study resort to

constructing coconut export price index following closely the methodology outlined in (Bazzi

and Blattman, 2014). I computed this index as a geometrically-weighted index of real export

prices for each country i in year t in region r:

Pirt =

J
(cid:89)

j=1

P wrjt
jt

Similar to Bazzi and Blattman (2014), this study captures price variations at the international

market level rather than domestic or farm-gate prices, using dollar-denominated international

market prices (Pjt). Each commodity price is weighted by wrjt, reflects the average share
of region r—to which country i belongs—in the global exports of the commodity.40 In this

regard we differ from (Bazzi and Blattman, 2014). The price index incorporates two coconut-

derived products: coconut oil and copra. Due to data limitations, international export prices

were derived primarily from Philippine and Indonesian benchmarks, the dominant exporters

in this market. Notably, the two price series exhibit similar trends, though coconut oil trades

at a slight premium over copra.41

B-3 Additional Results

40 This weighting scheme serves as a proxy for national export shares, as direct data for some countries
are unavailable. More specifically, this regional approach was adopted because for instance export data for
certain small island nations are not reported in standard sources (e.g., COMTRADE or FAO), either due to their
non-sovereign status or limited coverage.

41 The export data can be sourced from Index Mundi and the weights were computed based on data from

FAO trade statistics.
Given that the sample consists of only four sub-regions—Melanesia; Micronesia; Polynesia ; and South-Eastern
Asia—the computed weights does not sum up to 1

B.2

Table B1. COCONUT SUITABILITY AND CONFLICT INTENSITY (1989-2019)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Log[1+ # of fatalities]
Full Sample

Log[1+ # of fatalities Log[1+ # of fatalities Log[1 + # of civilian
org. group side]

on govt. side]

casualties]

coconut suitable × ln price

t

0.0383∗∗∗ 0.0408∗∗∗ 0.0492∗∗∗

drought

gold deposit × ln price

g

(0.0112)

(0.0130)
0.1017

(0.0141)
0.8128

(1.277)

(1.392)

0.0505
(0.0424)

Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Observations
R2

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

82,181
0.32511

66,567
0.30879

62,208
0.30297

0.0194∗∗

(0.0098)
0.1875

(0.9712)

0.0471
(0.0435)

Yes
Yes

62,208
0.23672

0.0297∗∗∗

(0.0083)
1.741∗

(1.019)

0.0034
(0.0028)

Yes
Yes

62,208
0.26055

0.0087∗∗

(0.0039)
0.2511

(0.3358)

0.0008
(0.0010)

Yes
Yes

62,208
0.12496

Note: *** Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

Table B2. COCONUT SUITABILITY AND VIOLENT CONFLICT: ROBUSTNESS TO
EXCLUSION OF POTENTIAL PRICE-MAKERS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Exclusion of PHL/IDN Exclusion of top 10%

coconut suitable × ln price
t

0.0184∗∗
(0.0083)

0.0553∗∗
(0.0237)

0.0224∗∗
(0.0109)

0.0756∗∗
(0.0364)

Cell-varying controls
Cell FE
Country × Year FE
Observations
R2

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

31,968
0.25058

31,968
0.23190

18,912
0.33553

18,912
0.31272

Note: The outcome variable in columns (1) and (3) is a dummy measuring
cell-year occurrence of violent events and that of columns (2) and (4)
is Log[1 + # of fatalities]. Exclusion of top 10% implies that countries
in my sample that are amongst the top global producers of coconut. ***
Statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests

B.3

]
s
e
i
t
i
l
a
t
a
f

f
o
#
+
1
[
g
o
L

)
8
(

)
7
(

)
6
(

)
5
(

)
4
(

)
3
(

)
2
(

)
1
(

S
R
O
R
R
E
N

I

I

N
O
I
T
A
L
E
R
R
O
C
R
O
F
G
N
W
O
L
L
A
—
S
T
N
E
V
E
T
N
E
L
O
I
V
D
N
A
Y
T
I
L
I
B
A
T
I
U
S
T
U
N
O
C
O
C

.

3
B
e
l
b
a
T

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

2
9
4
0
.
0

∗
]
9
9
2
0
.
0
[

∗
]
4
9
2
0
.
0
[

∗
]
0
7
2
0
.
0
[

∗
∗
]
9
3
2
0
.
0
[

∗
∗
]
8
0
2
0
.
0
[

∗
∗
∗
]
1
4
1
0
.
0
[

∗
∗
∗
]
1
4
1
0
.
0
[

∗
∗
]
2
2
0
0
.
0
[

t

e
c
i
r
p
n

l

×
e
l
b
a
t
i
u
s

t
u
n
o
c
o
c

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

m
k
0
0
5

m
k
0
0
2

m
k
0
5
1

m
k
0
0
1

m
k
5
7

m
k
0
5

m
k
0
1

0
0
0
,
0
0
1
=
L

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

8
0
2
,
2
6

7
9
2
0
3
.
0

y
e
l
n
o
C

t
s
e
W
d
n
a

y
e
w
e
N

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

g
n
i
y
r
a
v
-
l
l
e
C

E
F

r
a
e
Y
×
y
r
t
n
u
o
C

E
F

l
l
e
C

s
r
o
r
r
E
-
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

2
R

B.4

s
t
s
e
t

s
i
s
e
h
t
o
p
y
h
d
e
d
i
s
-
o
w

t

r
o
f

l
l
a

,
l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

e
h
t

t
a

*
d
n
a

,
l
e
v
e
l

%
5

e
h
t

t
a

*
*

,
l
e
v
e
l

%
1

e
h
t

t
a

e
c
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
s

i

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S

*
*
*

:
e
t
o
N

References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A Robinson. 2001. “The colonial origins of com-

parative development: An empirical investigation.” American economic review 91(5):1369–
1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of fortune:

Geography and institutions in the making of the modern world income distribution.” The
Quarterly journal of economics 117(4):1231–1294.

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, James Fenske, Gaurav Khanna and Anant Nyshadham. 2021. “Re-

sources, conflict, and economic development in Africa.” Journal of Development Economics
149:102598.

Agricultural Business. 2025. “The Ultimate Guide to Coconut Farming: Techniques, Profit,

and Best Practices by Region.” Agricultural Business. Accessed: 2025-04-04.

URL: https://agricbusiness.com.ng/ultimate-guide-to-coconut-farming/

Alesina, Alberto, Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou. 2016. “Ethnic inequality.”

Journal of Political Economy 124(2):428–488.

Arbatlı, Cemal Eren, Quamrul H Ashraf, Oded Galor and Marc Klemp. 2020. “Diversity and

conflict.” Econometrica 88(2):727–797.

Asba, Abd Rasyid, Andi Lili Evita, Fathu Rahman and Nahdia Nur. 2020. The globalizing of

copra and coconut oil industry of Makassar before the second world war. In IOP Conference
Series: Earth and Environmental Science. Vol. 575 IOP Publishing p. 012094.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor. 2013a. “The “Out of Africa” hypothesis, human genetic
diversity, and comparative economic development.” American Economic Review 103(1):1–
46.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor. 2013b. “The “Out of Africa” hypothesis, human genetic
diversity, and comparative economic development.” American Economic Review 103(1):1–
46.

Austin, Gareth. 2008. “Resources, techniques, and strategies south of the Sahara: revising

the factor endowments perspective on African economic development, 1500–2000 1.” The
Economic history review 61(3):587–624.

Bank, Word. 2011. “World development report 2012: Gender equality and development.”

The World Bank 15.

Bazzi, Samuel and Christopher Blattman. 2014. “Economic shocks and conflict: Evidence

from commodity prices.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(4):1–38.

Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and punishment: An economic approach.” Journal of political

economy 76(2):169–217.

Berman, Nicolas, Mathieu Couttenier, Dominic Rohner and Mathias Thoenig. 2017. “This

mine is mine! How minerals fuel conflicts in Africa.” American Economic Review
107(6):1564–1610.

Besley, Timothy J and Torsten Persson. 2008. The incidence of civil war: Theory and evidence.

Technical report National Bureau of Economic Research.

Biscaye, Pierre. 2023. “Agricultural Shocks and Conflict in the Short-and Long-Term: Evidence

from Desert Locust Swarms.”.

Blair, Graeme, Darin Christensen and Aaron Rudkin. 2021. “Do commodity price shocks

cause armed conflict? A meta-analysis of natural experiments.” American Political Science
Review 115(2):709–716.

Brecke, Peter. 1999. Violent conflicts 1400 AD to the present in different regions of the world.

In 1999 Meeting of the Peace Science Society. Vol. 10.

Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone. 2010. “International commodity prices, growth and

the outbreak of civil war in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The Economic Journal 120(544):519–534.

Calì, Massimiliano. 2014. Trading away from conflict: using trade to increase resilience in

fragile states. World Bank Publications.

Carter, David B, Andrew C Shaver and Austin L Wright. 2019. “Places to hide: Terrain,

ethnicity, and civil conflict.” The Journal of Politics 81(4):1446–1465.

Cerepak, Philip. 2019. “Coconuts: Catalysts of conflict.”.

Colella, Fabrizio, Rafael Lalive, Seyhun Orcan Sakalli and Mathias Thoenig. 2019. “Inference

with arbitrary clustering.”.

Colina, Antonio. 2018. “NPAs Earned P1. 48 B in 2017 Thru Extortion—AFP.” Manila Bulletin

.

Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 2004. “Greed and grievance in civil war.” Oxford economic

papers 56(4):563–595.

Conley, Timothy G. 1999. “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence.” Journal of

econometrics 92(1):1–45.

Crost, Benjamin and Joseph H Felter. 2020. “Export crops and civil conflict.” Journal of the

European Economic Association 18(3):1484–1520.

Dal Bó, Ernesto and Pedro Dal Bó. 2011. “Workers, warriors, and criminals: social conflict in

general equilibrium.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9(4):646–677.

Descals, Adrià, Serge Wich, Zoltan Szantoi, Matthew J Struebig, Rona Dennis, Zoe Hatton,

Thina Ariffin, Nabillah Unus, David LA Gaveau and Erik Meijaard. 2023. “High-resolution

global map of closed-canopy coconut palm.” Earth System Science Data 15(9):3991–4010.

Droessler, Holger. 2018. “Copra world: coconuts, plantations and cooperatives in German

Samoa.” The Journal of Pacific History 53(4):417–435.

Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F Vargas. 2013. “Commodity price shocks and civil conflict:

Evidence from Colombia.” Review of Economic studies 80(4):1384–1421.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic

divisions.” The quarterly journal of economics pp. 1203–1250.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, germs, and crops: how endowments

influence economic development.” Journal of monetary economics 50(1):3–39.

Esteban, Joan, Laura Mayoral and Debraj Ray. 2012. “Ethnicity and conflict: An empirical

study.” American Economic Review 102(4):1310–1342.

(FAO), Agriculture Organization and International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).

2008. Gender in agriculture sourcebook. World Bank Publications.

Fearon, James D and David D Laitin. 2003. “Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war.” American

political science review 97(1):75–90.

Fenske, James and Shizhuo Wang. 2023. “Tradition and mortality: Evidence from twin

infanticide in Africa.” Journal of Development Economics 163:103094.

Gantier, Marcelo. 2020. “Commodity Shocks, Factor Intensity and Conflicts in Africa.”.

Garfinkel, Michelle R and Stergios Skaperdas. 2007. “Economics of conflict: An overview.”

Handbook of defense economics 2:649–709.

Girard, Victoire, Teresa Molina-Millán, Guillaume Vic et al. 2022. Artisanal mining in Africa.

In Working Paper Series. No. 2201. NOVA AFRICA.

Giuliano, Paola and Nathan Nunn. 2013. The transmission of democracy: from the village to

the nation-state. Technical report National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gleditsch, Nils Petter, Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg and Håvard

Strand. 2002. “Armed conflict 1946-2001: A new dataset.” Journal of peace research
39(5):615–637.

Grossman, Herschell I. 1991. “A general equilibrium model of insurrections.” The American

Economic Review pp. 912–921.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1995. “Anarchy and its breakdown.” Journal of Political Economy 103(1):26–

52.

Hsiang, Solomon M, Kyle C Meng and Mark A Cane. 2011. “Civil conflicts are associated

with the global climate.” Nature 476(7361):438–441.

Humphrey, John. 2005. “Shaping value chains for development: global value chains in

agribusiness.” Paper written for the Deutsche Gessellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit
(GTZ) .

Humphreys, Macartan. 2005. “Natural resources, conflict, and conflict resolution: Uncovering

the mechanisms.” Journal of conflict resolution 49(4):508–537.

Iyer, Lakshmi. 2010. “Direct versus indirect colonial rule in India: Long-term consequences.”

The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4):693–713.

Iyigun, Murat, Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian. 2017. The long-run effects of agricultural pro-

ductivity on conflict, 1400-1900. Technical report National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jablonski, Ryan S and Steven Oliver. 2013. “The political economy of plunder: Economic

opportunity and modern piracy.” Journal of conflict resolution 57(4):682–708.

Kalyvas, Stathis N. 2006. The logic of violence in civil war. Cambridge University Press.

Keen, David. 2005. The economic functions of violence in civil wars. Routledge.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 2017. “Legal

origins.” The Long Economic and Political Shadow of History Volume I. A Global View p. 89.

Lowes, Sara, Nathan Nunn, James A Robinson and Jonathan L Weigel. 2017. “The evolution

of culture and institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom.” Econometrica 85(4):1065–
1091.

Marshall, Monty G., Ted Robert Gurr and Keith Jaggers. 2017. Polity IV Project: Political
Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2017. Vienna, VA: Center for Systemic Peace.
Dataset and codebook.

URL: https://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/p4manualv2017.pdf

McGuirk, Eoin and Marshall Burke. 2020. “The economic origins of conflict in Africa.” Journal

of Political Economy 128(10):3940–3997.

McLauchlin, Theodore. 2014. “Desertion, terrain, and control of the home front in civil

wars.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 58(8):1419–1444.

Michalopoulos, Stelios. 2012. “The origins of ethnolinguistic diversity.” American Economic

Review 102(4):1508–1539.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou. 2014. “National institutions and subnational

development in Africa.” The Quarterly journal of economics 129(1):151–213.

Moscona, Jacob, Nathan Nunn and James A Robinson. 2020. “Segmentary Lineage Organi-

zation and Conflict in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Econometrica 88(5):1999–2036.

Niu, Hebin, Jinman Wang, Zhaorui Jing and Biao Liu. 2023. “Identification and management

of land use conflicts in mining cities: A case study of Shuozhou in China.” Resources Policy
81:103301.

Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa.”

Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1):20–36.

Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon. 2011. “The slave trade and the origins of mistrust

in Africa.” American economic review 101(7):3221–3252.

Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian. 2011. “The potato’s contribution to population and ur-

banization: evidence from a historical experiment.” The quarterly journal of economics
126(2):593–650.

Olsson, Ola. 2007. “Conflict diamonds.” Journal of Development Economics 82(2):267–286.

Parachute Kalpavriksha. 2025. “What is the Best Climate for Coconut Planting?”. Accessed:

2025-04-27.

URL:

https://parachutekalpavriksha.org/blogs/blog-post/what-is-the-best-climate-for-

coconut-planting

Pettersson, Therése and Kristine Eck. 2018. “Organized violence, 1989–2017.” Journal of

Peace Research 55(4):535–547.

Quirke, Derek and Chloe Longmore. 2007. “SRA A review of the future prospects for the

world coconut industry and past research in coconut production and product.”.

Raleigh, Clionadh and Caitriona Dowd. 2015. “Armed conflict location and event data project

(ACLED) codebook.” Find this resource .

Research and Markets. 2024. Virgin Coconut Oil Market by Type, End-User - Global Forecast

2025-2030. Market Research Report ID: 5716522 Research and Markets. Accessed: 2025-

04-05.

URL: https://www.researchandmarkets.com/report/virgin-coconut-oil

Rigterink, Anouk S. 2020. “Diamonds, rebel’s and farmer’s best friend: Impact of variation in

the price of a lootable, labor-intensive natural resource on the intensity of violent conflict.”

Journal of Conflict Resolution 64(1):90–126.

Robinson, Mark. 2014. “Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty.”

Development Policy Review 32(1):154–156.

Ross, Michael L. 2004. “How do natural resources influence civil war? Evidence from thirteen

cases.” International organization 58(1):35–67.

Ross, Michael L. 2012. The oil curse: How petroleum wealth shapes the development of nations.

Princeton University Press.

Ross, Michael L. 2015. “What have we learned about the resource curse?” Annual review of

political science 18(1):239–259.

Skaperdas, Stergios. 1996. “Contest success functions.” Economic theory 7:283–290.

Snyder, Richard. 2006. “Does lootable wealth breed disorder? A political economy of

extraction framework.” Comparative political studies 39(8):943–968.

Snyder, Richard and Ravi Bhavnani. 2005. “Diamonds, blood, and taxes: A revenue-centered

framework for explaining political order.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 49(4):563–597.

Sundberg, Ralph and Erik Melander. 2013. “Introducing the UCDP Georeferenced Event

Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research 50(4):523–532.

Tajusso, Otamide. 2023. “Check out five profitable coconut-based business ideas.” Farming-

FarmersFarms. Accessed: 2025-04-04.

URL: https://farmingfarmersfarms.com/2023/03/check-out-five-profitable-coconut-based-

business-ideas/

Tollefsen, Andreas Forø, Håvard Strand and Halvard Buhaug. 2012. “PRIO-GRID: A unified

spatial data structure.” Journal of Peace Research 49(2):363–374.

Varian, Hal R. 2014. Intermediate Microeconomics: A Modern Approach. 9th ed. W.W. Norton

& Company.

Warner, B, D Quirke and C Longmore. 2007. “A review of the future prospects for the world

coconut industry and past research in coconut production and product.” Australian Centre
for International Agricultural Research pp. 1–78.

World Rainforest Movement. 2023. “Colonization and Monoculture Plantations: Histories of

Large-Scale ‘Grabbings’.”. Accessed: 2025-05-16.

URL: https://www.wrm.org.uy/bulletin-articles/colonization-and-monoculture-plantations-

histories-of-large-scale-grabbings

Wucherpfennig, Julian, Philipp Hunziker and Lars-Erik Cederman. 2016. “Who inherits

the state? Colonial rule and postcolonial conflict.” American Journal of Political Science
60(4):882–898.

Zakiah, Zakiah, Monalisa Monalisa, Ahmad Humam Hamid, Fauzan Fauzan and Ade Ratna

Juniar. 2021. Price Asymmetric Evaluation on the Cocoa Market as an Effort to Increase

Economic and Bargaining Position of Cocoa Farmers in Pidie, Aceh. In 1st International

Conference on Sustainable Agricultural Socio-economics, Agribusiness, and Rural Development
(ICSASARD 2021). Atlantis Press pp. 5–12.

Country Level Supplementary File

Table SA1. List of Countries Included in the Study

Code Country

Region

Code Country

Region

AFG

Afghanistan

Asia

AGO Angola

Africa

ALB

Albania

ARG

Argentina

AUS

Australia

Europe

ARE

UAE

Middle East

S America

ARM Armenia

Asia

Oceania

AUT

Austria

Europe

AZE

Azerbaijan

Asia

BDI

Burundi

Belgium

Europe

BEN

Benin

Africa

Africa

Burkina Faso

Africa

BGD

Bangladesh

Asia

BEL

BFA

BGR

Bulgaria

BLR

Belarus

BOL

Bolivia

BTN

Bhutan

Europe

Europe

BIH

BLZ

Bosnia

Belize

S America

BRA

Brazil

Europe

C America

S America

Asia

BWA

Botswana

Africa

CAF

Central African Republic Africa

CAN

Canada

N America

CHE

Switzerland

Europe

CHL

Chile

S America

CHN China

CMR

Cameroon

COL

Colombia

CUB

Cuba

DEU

Germany

DOM Dominica

ECU

Ecuador

ERI

EST

FIN

Eritrea

Estonia

Finland

GAB

Gabon

GEO Georgia

GIN

Guinea

GNB

Guinea-Bissau

GRC

Greece

GUY

Guyana

HRV

Croatia

HUN Hungary

Asia

Africa

CIV

Côte d’Ivoire

Africa

COG

Congo

Africa

S America

CRI

Costa Rica

C America

Caribbean

CZE

Czechia

Europe

DNK

Denmark

Caribbean DZA

Algeria

S America

EGY

Egypt

Africa

ESP

Spain

Europe

ETH

Ethiopia

Europe

FRA

France

Africa

Asia

Africa

Africa

GBR

UK

GHA

Ghana

GMB Gambia

GNQ Eq. Guinea

Europe

Europe

Africa

Africa

Europe

Africa

Europe

Europe

Africa

Africa

Africa

Europe

GTM Guatemala

C America

S America HND Honduras

C America

Europe

Europe

HTI

IDN

Haiti

Caribbean

Indonesia

Asia

SA.1

Table SA1 – Continued

Code Country

Region

Code Country

Region

IND

IRN

ISR

JOR

KAZ

India

Iran

Israel

Jordan

Kazakhstan

KGZ

Kyrgyzstan

KOR

S Korea

LAO

Laos

LBR

LKA

LTU

LVA

Liberia

Sri Lanka

Lithuania

Latvia

Asia

MidEast

MidEast

MidEast

Asia

Asia

Asia

Asia

Africa

Asia

Europe

IRL

IRQ

ITA

JPN

Ireland

Iraq

Italy

Japan

KEN

Kenya

Europe

MidEast

Europe

Asia

Africa

KHM Cambodia

Asia

KWT

Kuwait

LBN

Lebanon

Libya

Lesotho

LBY

LSO

LUX

MidEast

MidEast

Africa

Africa

Luxembourg

Europe

Europe

MAR Morocco

Africa

MDA Moldova

Europe

MDG Madagascar

Africa

MEX Mexico

MLI Mali

MNG Mongolia

MRT Mauritania

MYS Malaysia

NER

Niger

N America MKD N Macedonia

Europe

Africa

Asia

Africa

Asia

Africa

MMR Myanmar

Asia

MOZ Mozambique

Africa

MWI Malawi

NAM Namibia

NGA

Nigeria

Africa

Africa

Africa

NIC

Nicaragua

C America NLD

Netherlands

Europe

NOR Norway

Europe

NPL

Nepal

Asia

NZL

New Zealand

Oceania

OMN Oman

MidEast

PAK

PER

Pakistan

Peru

PNG

PNG

PRK

N Korea

PRY

Paraguay

ROU

Romania

RWA

Rwanda

SDN

Sudan

SLE

Sierra Leone

SOM Somalia

SVN

Slovenia

Asia

PAN

Panama

C America

S America

PHL

Philippines

Asia

Oceania

Asia

POL

PRT

Poland

Portugal

S America QAT

Qatar

Europe

Europe

MidEast

Europe

Africa

Africa

Africa

Africa

RUS

SAU

SEN

SLV

Russia

Europe/Asia

Saudi Arabia MidEast

Senegal

Africa

El Salvador

C America

SVK

Slovakia

Europe

SWE

Sweden

SA.2

Europe

Europe

Table SA1 – Continued

Code Country

Region

Code Country

Region

SYR

Syria

TGO Togo

TJK

Tajikistan

TUN

Tunisia

TZA

Tanzania

UKR

Ukraine

MidEast

TCD

Chad

THA

Thailand

Africa

Asia

Africa

Asia

Africa

Africa

TKM Turkmenistan Asia

TUR

Turkey

Asia/Europe

UGA

Uganda

Africa

Europe

URY

Uruguay

S America

USA

United States

N America UZB

Uzbekistan

VEN

Venezuela

S America

VNM Vietnam

YEM Yemen

MidEast

ZAF

S Africa

COD

DR Congo

Africa

ZMB

Zambia

ZWE

Zimbabwe

Asia

Asia

Africa

Africa

Africa

SA.3

Table SA2. Descriptive Statistics

Civil conflict incidence, 1961—2017 average

Civil conflict onset, frequency over 1961—2017

Ln[1 + coconut area]

Mean elevation

Ruggedness

Distance to nearest waterway

Island nation dummy

Oil or gas reserve discovery

Cropland area

Oil palm suitable area

Banana suitable area

Rubber suitable area

Sweet potato suitable area

Wetland rice suitable area

Democracy

Executive constraints

Log [population density in 1500 CE]

Urbanization rate in 1500 CE

Neolithic transition timing

Percentile

Mean

SD

10th

90th

Sample (N=148)

0.17

1.03

3.20

0.59

0.13

0.35

0.047

0.67

0.39

5.47

10.3

4.67

24.8

17.0

3.65

3.82

0.93

7.46

0.25

1.38

4.22

0.55

0.13

0.46

0.21

0.47

0.25

24.2

36.2

21.9

80.8

53.6

3.61

1.96

1.50

5.13

0

0

0

0.10

0.018

0.034

0

0

0.046

0

0

0

0

0

0

1.44

-0.74

0

0.54

2

9.32

1.25

0.28

1.01

0

1

0.72

9.80

26.1

8.87

52.7

30.5

10

7

3.18

13

4892.8 2387.3

1800

8000

Neolithic transition timing [ancestry adjusted]

5360.6 2076.2 2891.2 8026.5

Neolithic transition timing [1500 CE baseline]

4392.8 2387.3

1300

7500

Subsistence mode in 1000 CE

Log [1 + distance to regional frontier in 1 CE]

Log [1 + distance to regional frontier in 1000 CE]

Log [1 + distance to regional frontier in 1500 CE]

Predicted genetic diversity

Predicted genetic diversity [ancestry adjusted]

Ethnic fractionalization

Sub-humid tropics cropland share

British legal origin dummy

French legal origin dummy

Ever a U.K. colony dummy

0.97

7.38

7.40

7.30

0.71

0.73

0.47

0.10

0.25

0.46

0.12

0.14

1.29

1.20

1.58

0.052

0.027

0.25

0.19

0.43

0.50

0.33

Ever a French colony dummy

0.0068

0.082

Ever a non-U.K./non-French colony dummy

0.047

0.21

1

6.26

6.33

6.20

0.62

0.69

0.11

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

8.42

8.44

8.46

0.75

0.75

0.79

0.39

1

1

1

0

0

SA.4

Sub-national Level Supplementary File

Figure SB1. 30 arc-minute resolution of the study area

SB.1

Table SB1. Descriptive Statistics

N

Mean

SD

Minimum Maximum

Violent Events Measures

SB violent event (Crude)

SB violent event (PRIO-25)

SB violence over territory

SB violence over governance

NSB violent event (Crude)

NSB violent event (PRIO-25)

Number of fatalities, SB

Number of fatalities, SB-government

Number of fatalities, SB-organized group

Number of fatalities, SB-civilian casualties

Number of fatalities, NSB

Number of fatalities, NSB-government

82,708

0.021

82,708

0.002

82,708

0.011

82,708

0.010

82,708

0.002

82,708

0.001

82,708

0.274

82,708

0.092

82,708

0.140

82,708

0.013

82,708

0.071

82,708

0.006

Number of fatalities, NSB-organized group

82,708

0.014

Number of fatalities, NSB-civilian casualties

82,708

0.000

UCDP-GED
0.143

0.048

0.103

0.102

0.043

0.023

6.664

2.049

4.571

0.465

4.668

0.313

1.312

0.041

ACLED

Number of violence events

26,680

0.726

11.760

Number of demonstration events

Number of political events

Number of strategic development

Number of battles

Number of explosive/remote events

Number of riots

Number of protests

26,680

0.067

26,680

0.206

26,680

0.033

26,680

0.150

26,680

0.049

26,680

0.026

26,680

0.048

1.119

3.108

0.438

2.587

0.906

0.450

0.847

Number of violence against civilians

26,680

0.421

10.780

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1,189

225

1,012

100

1,000

50

305

7

964

76

322

20

320

52

28

62

958

0.993

Other variables

Coconut suitability

Price index

Gold cells

Gold price

Drought exposure

Government effectiveness (in period t − 1)
Political & absence of violence (in period t − 1)
Rule of law (in period t − 1)
Regulatory quality (in period t − 1)
Voice & accountability (in period t − 1)
Average elevation in cell (rescaled by 1000)

82,181

0.232

0.226

82,708 465.860 494.050

1.017

2,276.300

82,708

0.002

0.048

0

1

64,032 565.720 395.880

270.990

1,669.500

66,954

0.000

48,480

0.192

48,480

0.129

48,480

0.030

48,480

0.055

48,480

0.093

80,042

0.328

0.001

0.394

0.335

0.172

0.228

0.290

0.431

0.150

−0.003
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0.003

1

1

1

1

1

4.593

0.891

Average distance to coast in cell (rescaled by 1000) 80,197

0.093

Note: SB = State-Based and NSB = Non State-Based

SB.2

