Federal State Autonomous Educational Institution for 
Higher Education National Research University  
Higher School of Economics 

Faculty of Computer Science  

         BSc Applied Mathematics and Information Science 

BACHELOR'S THESIS 
Research project 
Solving Unpaired Translation Problems via 
Diffusion Distillation 

Submitted by Tiazhova Natalia Andreevna 
student of group #БПМИ211, 4th year of study, 

Approved by Supervisor: 
Research Fellow 
Faculty of Computer Science, HSE university  
Rakitin Denis Romanovich 

Moscow 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

Annotation

1 Introduction

2 Literature review

2.1 GAN-based models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Diffusion-based models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Optimal transport based methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Background

4 Methodology

5 Experiments

5.1 MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Wild2Cat

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusion

References

3

4

5

5

5

6

6

10

10

11

13

15

16

2

Annotation

Image-to-image translation is a fundamental problem in computer vision, aiming to map

images from one domain to another while preserving their underlying content. Modern methods

for solving this task are mainly divided into three families with their significant drawbacks: ap-

proaches based on diffusion models suffer from slow inference, based on GANs are fast, but have

inferior generation quality, and optimal transport based are theoretically justified but are hard

to scale. In this work, we suggest modifying the state-of-the-art GAN-based method CUT by re-

placing the adversarial training with the Distribution Matching technique of diffusion distillation.

We qualitatively show that this would synergize the advantages of both approaches, potentially

achieving a balance between fast inference and high-quality image generation.

Аннотация

Задача перевода изображений между доменами является одной из ключевых проблем

в компьютерном зрении. Её цель — преобразовывать изображения из одного домена в дру-

гой, сохраняя их смысловое содержание. Современные методы решения этой задачи делятся

на три основные группы, каждая из которых имеет существенные недостатки: диффузион-

ные модели обеспечивают высокое качество, но работают медленно; GAN-методы выполняют

преобразование быстро, но уступают в качестве генерации; методы оптимального транспорта

имеют теоретическое обоснование, но плохо масштабируются. В данной работе мы предлага-

ем модифицировать передовой GAN-метод CUT, заменив состязательное обучение на метод

Distribution Matching, применяемый для дистилляции диффузионых моделей. Более того,

мы демонстрируем, что такой подход объединит преимущества обеих методик, потенциаль-

но обеспечив баланс между скоростью вывода и высоким качеством генерации изображений.

Keywords

Unpaired image-to-image translation, distribution matching, diffusion models, contrastive

learning

3

1 Introduction

In this work, we propose an approach to unpaired domain translation, specifically, the un-

paired image-to-image problem. This is an important task because its solution allows for domain

translation without requiring paired datasets, which are often difficult or expensive to obtain.

This flexibility enables practical applications like medical imaging, style transfer, and photo en-

hancement, where aligned data is scarce or unavailable.

The key challenge is that for training there are no paired samples (X0, Y0) . . . (Xn, Yn),

where Xi is an image from the source domain and Yi is the corresponding image from the tar-

get domain. On the contrary, there are two independent datasets (X0, . . . , Xn) and (Y0, . . . , Yn),

and the exact mapping between them is unknown. The existing models for solving the problem

are divided into three main families, each with its inherent benefits and limitations. Optimal

transport-based methods are well theorized but computationally expensive and poorly scaled.

GAN-based approaches offer fast inference but often fall short of covering all modes of the distri-

bution. Meanwhile, diffusion-based techniques are relatively slow but deliver superior generation

quality. Therefore, we suggest taking a GAN method as a basis and improving it by applying

diffusion models while maintaining the speed of generation.

One way to do this is to combine two state-of-the-art approaches in each family of models:

Contrastive Unpaired Translation [11] as the basic GAN method and Distribution Matching Dis-

tillation [15] as the improving diffusion technique. DMD allows for using the pretrained diffusion

as a training signal, which gives realistic pictures. Meanwhile, CUT combines adversarial training

with preserving the proximity between pictures by contrastive loss. This substitution aims to

compensate for CUT’s inferior generation quality while retaining its main advantage being fast

generation.

The primary goal of this work is to develop and evaluate the proposed method. The key

tasks are as follows. Firstly, rewriting training and evaluation scripts in the codebase to adapt the

framework for our specific tasks. Secondly, implementing custom loss functions and making novel

architectural modifications. Thirdly, conducting comparative experiments on unpaired datasets

to validate performance, where we aim to demonstrate quantitative and qualitative advantages.

Fourthly, establishing directions for future optimization.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 provides an introduction to the research

field and outlines the problems and tasks. Related works are discussed in Section 2. Section 3

suggests the methodology and describes the proposed approach in detail. Section 4 is devoted to

a discussion of the current results, followed by a conclusion and future work in Section 5.

4

2 Literature review

2.1 GAN-based models

For a long time, GANs were a prevalent paradigm for image-to-image translation. They

learn a generator that generates images on the inference time and a discriminator that learns to

distinguish the real images from the fake ones using adversarial loss. The GAN-based approaches

for the considered task mostly can be categorized into two families: one-sided, which require only

the target generator, and two-sided, which require both the source and the target networks.

The most popular one-sided models are CycleGAN [18] and DiscoGAN [7]. They are trained

using cycle-consistency loss, enforcing that translating an image from the source to the target and

back to the source should result in the original image (and vice versa). This ensures meaningful

translations that retain the features of the original.

In contrast, CUT [11] is a one-sided method, so it needs only the target generator.

It

uses the adversarial loss as any other GAN method, but also exploits its own PatchNCELoss for

preserving proximity between the input and the output. This loss is responsible for input-output

similarity and is calculated using supervised contrastive loss for patches of an image. This method

is state-of-the-art among those based on GAN architectures.

However, GAN-based models have inferior performance than diffusion-based approaches,

as it was shown in EGSDE [17]. Moreover, as any other GAN architecture, they suffer from mode

collapse [1]: the network usually learns only a few modes of the target distribution and ignores

the others.

2.2 Diffusion-based models

Diffusion models consider the process of gradual picture noising and generate pictures from

noise by reversing this process in time. Approaches based on them are also divided into two types:

one-sided and two-sided.

One-sided methods require only the target domain diffusion model. Among them, SDEdit [10]

partially stochastically noises the input and denoises it with the target domain network. ILVR [2]

guides the translation process by conditioning on the input/reference image. EGSDE extends this

idea by introducing the energy function that allows to preserve the domain-independent features

and discard domain-specific ones.

Two-sided methods suggest concatenating the source and the target diffusion models. One

of the successful instances of this idea is DDIB [14]. It deterministically encodes the input image

5

into noise with the source model and transforms it into the output with the target model, resulting

in a cycle-consistent high-quality mapping.

Although these methods in general have superior generation quality than the GAN-based

ones, they suffer from the need to invoke the neural network dozens of times during the generation

time, resulting in relatively slow performance.

2.3 Optimal transport based methods

The last family of unpaired image-to-image translation approaches is methods based on

optimal transport. OT is a mathematical problem for finding the most efficient way to move

mass from one distribution to another. Therefore, optimal transport is a logical formalization of

translation between domains problem, so techniques from this group are the most theoretically

explained.

One of the popular approaches in this field is Neural Optimal Transport [8]. It exploits

the optimal transport idea of finding a mapping with the least transport cost and adds a regu-

larizer that is responsible for making the network outputs coincide with the target distribution.

Although it is a theoretically well-explained and scalable method, it suffers from problems similar

to GAN, because it is also based on adversarial training. Another area of work in this direction is

Schrodinger bridges that try to combine diffusion-based models and optimal transport, but they

are computationally expensive, have low scalability [3].

3 Background

As we have discovered, adversarial-based methods for unpaired image-to-image translation

are the fastest and computationally cheap, but they suffer from worse image quality and mode

collapse. Therefore, this work suggests replacing adversarial loss with more modern methods and

giving superior generation quality diffusion distillation methods. The basis of our method is the

state-of-the-art GAN-based method CUT [11] and one of the best distillation technique DMD [15].

The first introduces an effective way of measuring the distance between the samples preserving

semantic quality and not just the per-pixel similarity. The second uses a pre-trained diffusion

model as a discriminator that measures the likelihood of the samples and pushes the generator

towards producing realistic samples.

Contrastive Unpaired Translation. CUT uses a contrastive learning framework to

ensure that the translated image preserves the content of the source image while adopting the

6

style of the target domain.

It works as is shown on the figure 3.1:

for an input image x, the

generator G produces a translated image ˆy. Then x and ˆy both are divided into S patches. For

each patch, the method extracts features from L selected layers in G’s encoder, processing them

through a two-layer MLP network Hl to generate feature stacks zl = Hl(Gl
enc(ˆy)) for the output, where Gl

image and ˆzl = Hl(Gl

enc represents the output of the l-th chosen

enc(x)) for the source

layer. For each patch for each ˆzs

l there is a corresponding encoded patch in the original image

that is denoted as zs

l and the rest of patches are denoted as zS\s

.

l

Figure 3.1: A schematic diagram of the PatchNCELoss as presented in the original CUT paper.

Then the generator and discriminator are trained using the following loss:

LGAN (G, D, X, Y )+λXLP atchN CE(G, H, X) + λY LP atchN CE(G, H, Y )

where LGAN (G, D, X, Y ) is the usual adversarial loss that pushes matching between the output

images and the target distribution:

LGAN (G, D, X, Y ) =Ey∼Y log D(y) + Ex∼X log(1 − D(G(x)))

and LP atchN CE(G, H, X) is a measure of input-output similarity calculated as follows:

l(ˆzs

l , zs

l , zS\s

l

)

LP atchN CE(G, H, X) = Ex∼X

L
(cid:88)

Sl(cid:88)

i=1

i=1

7

where l is supervised contrastive loss:

(cid:34)

l(v, x, y) = − log

exp(v · x/τ )

(cid:35)

exp(v · x/τ ) + (cid:80)N

n=1 exp(v · yn/τ )

To sum up, CUT exploits two ideas: adversarial learning for consistency with the target dis-

tribution and PatchNCELoss to measure the similarity of source and target images by comparing

neural network representations of patches of these images.

Diffusion models. Diffusion models [5],

[13] learn to generate data by consequently

denoising images corrupted by a diffusion forward process. It transforms an initial distribution p0

towards some simple noise distribution with a stochastic differential equation (SDE):

dxt = F (xt, t)dt + g(t)dwt

where F (xt, t) is a drift function which represents the velocity vector, g(t) is a diffusion coefficient

controlling the magnitude of stochastic forces, and wt stands for a standard Wiener process.

The same dynamics can be described as an ODE by removing stochasticity:

(cid:20)

dxt =

F (xt, t) −

(cid:21)
g(t)2∇ log pt(xt)

dt

1
2

where ∇ log pt(xt) is a score-function of the marginal distribution pt at xt.

The forward ODE and both reverse-time ODE and SDE (for sampling images from a

diffusion model) require knowledge of the score function log pt(xt). However, pt is intractable in

practice. Instead, diffusion models learn a score network sϕ(xt, t) to approximate the score-function

by minimizing the weighted Denoising Score Matching objective:

(cid:90) T

t=0

w(t)E

x0∼p0
xt|x0∼pt(xt|x0)

∥sϕ(xt, t) − ∇xt log pt(xt|x0)∥2

2dt.

where w(t) controls the importance of different noise levels and pt(xt|x0) is a conditional transition

distribution of the forward diffusion process.

The synthesized samples can then be drawn by reversing the forward process ODE or SDE

using the score network sϕ(xt, t).

Distribution Matching Distillation. Distribution Matching Distillation distills a teacher

diffusion model sreal into a one-step generator Gθ. Theoretically, it can be done by minimizing the

KL divergence between distributions of the generator and the teacher. However, a diffusion model

does not learn the exact score function of the original distribution, but rather an approximation

8

noised to an arbitrary time level. Moreover, the exact score function can exhibit pathological

behavior — if it is defined on a manifold, it vanishes almost everywhere except near the manifold,

where its norm blows up to extremely large values. To address these problems, the authors exploit

Integral KL [9]:

LIKL(q, p) =

(cid:90) T

t=0

w(t)DKL(qt, pt) dt =

(cid:90) T

t=0

w(t)Ext∼qt

(cid:20)

log

(cid:21)

dt

qt(xt)
pt(xt)

where qt and pt denote the marginal densities of the forward SDE initialized with the distributions

of the generator and the teacher respectively.

It integrates the KL divergence along a diffusion process, which allows using knowledge

from the pretrained diffusion model sreal at multiple diffusion time steps.

The gradient of this IKL divergence with respect to the generator parameters can be ex-

pressed as the integrated difference between the score functions of the teacher and the generator

output distributions:

∇θLIKL =

(cid:90) T

t=0

w(t)E z∼N (0,I)
x0=Gθ(z)
xt|x0∼pt(xt|x0)

(cid:2)st

q(x) − st

p(x)(cid:3) ∂xt
∂θ

dt

where st

q and st

p are score functions of the marginal distributions with densities pt and qt.
p is provided by the pretrained diffusion model sreal, the primary task reduces to training an

As st

additional diffusion model sfake

ϕ

to approximate qt.

As a result, the training process consists of two alternating phases:

1 Optimizing the generator Gθ by minimizing the IKL divergence loss,

2 Updating the auxiliary diffusion model sfake

ϕ

to match the generator’s synthetic distribution.

The loss is used for the training is an improved via adaptive weighting and simplified parametriza-

tion version of DSM objective being EDM loss [6]:

(cid:90) T

t=0

w(t)E

x0∼p0
xt|x0∼pt(xt|x0)

∥Dfake
ϕ

(xt, t) − x0∥2

2dt.

where w(t) is an adaptive weight based on signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and Dfake

ϕ

(xt, t) is a denoiser

parametrization of the diffusion model:

sfake
ϕ

(x, t) =

Dfake
ϕ

(x, t) − x
g2(t)

9

4 Methodology

In this section, we introduce our approach. As mentioned before, it suggests replacing the

adversarial learning part of CUT loss with DMD loss.

More precisely, we aim to train a generator G that translates images from the source domain

to the target. As in the DMD setup, we have a diffusion model pretrained on the target domain

sreal and an auxiliary trainable diffusion model sfake to approximate the distribution of the outputs

of G. Then the generator is updated with the merged loss:

LIKL + λOTLPatchNCE

where λOT controls the similarity of generator inputs and outputs, and LPatchNCE is the CUT loss

without the adversarial part. The sfake is trained on EDM loss.

This is a meaningful replacement because DMD is a high-quality framework that ensures

hitting the target distribution in general, moreover, it has been already used as a replacement

and has given better quality than the original approach. For example, the RDMD model [12]

combines L2 loss with DMD and obtains results, often superior to one-way diffusion and OT-

based models. In this work, there is a more high-quality loss: PatchNCELoss instead of L2, so

much more attention is paid to preserving image features rather than just pixel-by-pixel proximity.

This can improve the quality even further.

In practice, we have several problems to solve. Firstly, it is necessary to generalize the

PatchNCELoss on UNet architectures used in the diffusions since the DMD method explicitly

assumes the same generator and diffusion architectures. Secondly, old architectures used in CUT

should be replaced with more modern and high-quality ones. Thirdly, we need to optimize the

hyperparameters and make a valid comparison with baselines.

5 Experiments

This section evaluates the proposed method CUT+DMD on two unpaired image translation

tasks. In Section 5.1, we assess performance on digit translation between classes 3 and 2 from

the MNIST dataset, while Section 5.2 examines the translation between wild felines and domestic

cats using the AFHQv2 dataset.

We use identical denoiser architecture and parameterization across all components: the

target score model, fake score model, and generator. The pretrained target score is utilized in

two ways: providing the starting weights for the fake score model, and initializing the generator

10

with fixed noise level of 1.0 to accommodate its single-step nature. The denoiser parameterization

is trained to predict the clean images of the target domain, therefore, such initialization should

significantly speed up convergence and nudge the model to use the information about the target

domain more efficiently. During training, we optimize the generator once per every three updates

of the fake score model.

To quantitatively assess the quality of the methods, we employ five standard metrics:

1 SSIM (Structural Similarity Index)

Measures structural similarity between generated and target images, focusing on luminance,

contrast, and structure. Values range from 0 to 1, where higher values indicate better image

structure preservation.

2 PSNR (Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio)

Quantifies pixel-level fidelity by comparing the maximum possible signal power to noise

(MSE). Expressed in decibels (dB), higher PSNR values denote lower pixel-wise distortion.

3 LPIPS (Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity) [16]

Evaluates perceptual similarity using feature extraction from pretrained networks. Lower

LPIPS scores reflect better semantic alignment with the target domain.

4 FID (Fréchet Inception Distance) [4]

Compares the distributions of generated and real images in feature space (via Inception-v3).

Lower FID values indicate closer alignment with the target distribution at a high level.

5 L2 (Euclidean distance)

Quantifies pixel-level similarity of the generated and target images.

5.1 MNIST

We compare the proposed method CUT+DMD with the baseline RDMD[12], which often

obtains results superior to the one-way diffusion and OT-based models. Additionally, we modify

the original CUT pipeline by removing its two-layer MLP applied to the image patches. We

hypothesize that this component slows convergence, and our ablation study confirms that its

removal improves training dynamics.

The results on the train MNIST data are represented in the table 5.1. Notably, our MLP-

free variant achieves a comparable FID score, outperforming all baselines in both L2 and LPIPS

11

SSIM

PSNR

LPIPS

L2

FID

0.5513
RDMD
CUT+DMD w/o MLP 0.5920
0.5555
CUT+DMD w/ MLP

14.4424
15.0165
14.4057

0.1755
0.1598
0.1740

10.8196
10.2195
10.9207

7.6910
7.5804
7.9357

Table 5.1: Metrics on the train MNIST data

metrics. This indicates that our generator produces images closer to the target distribution (class

2), both in terms of pixel-level and semantic similarity, without image quality degradation.

Theoretically, one might anticipate a slight increase in L2 error (reduced pixel-level ac-

curacy) alongside a decrease in LPIPS (improved perceptual quality), as the model prioritizes

high-level features over strict pixel matching. We hypothesize that this trade-off would become

more pronounced on more complex datasets, where semantic consistency and stylistic preservation

play a greater role.

SSIM

PSNR

LPIPS

L2

FID

RDMD
0.5552
CUT+DMD w/o MLP 0.5948
0.5565
CUT+DMD w/ MLP

14.5601
15.1277
14.5240

0.1722
0.1571
0.1748

10.6958
10.0972
10.7784

8.1010
8.2204
8.1293

Table 5.2: Metrics on the test MNIST data

Table 5.2 shows consistent results, with the CUT+RDMD without MLP method main-

taining its superior metrics at levels comparable to the training dataset results. This consistency

between training and test performance indicates robust learning stability of the proposed archi-

tecture and also suggests that the model generalized effectively without overfitting to the training

data.

Figure 5.1: Generator outputs on MNIST train data: (1) Source, (2) RDMD, (3) MLP-free
DMD+CUT, (4) DMD+CUT with MLP

Meanwhile, qualitative results can be observed in figure 5.1 for train MNIST data and

figure 5.2 for test MNIST data. They demonstrate that while all evaluated methods achieve

12

plausible digit-to-digit translation, the MLP-free CUT+DMD model outperforms alternatives by

striking an optimal balance between content accuracy and style fidelity. For instance, this method

demonstrates superior preservation of digit stroke width (as in the seventh column of the figure 5.2)

and angularity (as in the third column of the figure 5.2) compared to the alternative approaches,

especially on the test data.

Figure 5.2: Generator outputs on MNIST test data:
DMD+CUT, (4) DMD+CUT with MLP

(1) Source, (2) RDMD, (3) MLP-free

5.2 Wild2Cat

As in the previous subchapter, we compare MLP-free CUT+DMD (as it gave better results

on the MNIST data) with the baseline RDMD[12]. Given that RDMD combines DMD and L2

regularization term weighted by λOT, we explore different values of λOT.

SSIM PSNR LPIPS

L2

FID

DMD+CUT w/o MLP, λOT = 0.2
DMD+CUT w/o MLP, λOT = 1.0
RDMD, λOT = 0.05
RDMD, λOT = 0.1

0.445
0.535
0.496
0.544

15.75
16.48
16.71
17.35

0.394
0.357
0.385
0.365

18.62
17.05
16.61
15.43

24.12
22.74
17.97
17.82

Table 5.3: Metrics on the test Wild2Cat data

The quantitative results for the test data are presented in table 5.3. Our analysis reveals

that RDMD with λOT = 0.1 and MLP-free DMD+CUT with λOT = 1.0 achieve comparable

performance in terms of perceptual similarity, indicating that both methods effectively preserve

the style of input images. However, the DMD+CUT underperforms the RDMD on image quality

metrics (PSNR and FID), suggesting its generated cat images appear less realistic.

We attribute this phenomenon to the inherent similarity between the domestic cat and

wild feline domains. In such cases of domain proximity, increasing the regularization coefficient

demonstrably improves both input-output similarity and FID scores. This consistent pattern is

observable across all provided results tables.

13

Based on these findings, we hypothesize that increasing λOT could enable DMD+CUT to

achieve FID scores comparable to RDMD.

Figure 5.3: Generator outputs on Wild2Cat train data: (1) Source, (2) MLP-free DMD+CUT,
λOT = 0.2, (3) MLP-free DMD+CUT, λOT = 1.0 (4) RDMD, λOT = 0.05, (5) RDMD, λOT = 0.1

In the meanwhile, qualitative results are represented in the figures 5.3 for the train dataset

and in 5.4 for the test dataset. While DMD+CUT achieves comparable LPIPS and SSIM scores

and lower FID than RDMD, its outputs – particularly with λOT = 1.0 – demonstrate stronger

structural alignment with input images. This manifests in two key aspects. Firstly, the method

exhibits enhanced preservation of facial contour, as evidenced in the third column of the train

figure 5.3 and the fourth column of the test figure 5.4. Secondly, it shows improved retention of

facial expressions, visible in the fourth and tenth columns of the train 5.3 and the third and eighth

columns of the test 5.4.

Figure 5.4: Generator outputs on Wild2Cat test data: (1) Source, (2) MLP-free DMD+CUT,
λOT = 0.2, (3) MLP-free DMD+CUT, λOT = 1.0 (4) RDMD, λOT = 0.05, (5) RDMD, λOT = 0.1

14

6 Conclusion

For the thesis research, we developed an implementation of the proposed DMD+CUT

method by modifying an existing codebase. This required substantial technical work includ-

ing: rewriting training and evaluation scripts, implementing custom loss functions, and making

novel architectural modifications to adapt the framework for our specific tasks. The implemented

method was subsequently evaluated on several datasets. The results revealed two distinct out-

comes: on the MNIST dataset, the approach demonstrated unambiguous improvements across

all evaluation metrics, while on the Wild2Cat dataset it showed slightly inferior quantitative per-

formance despite producing qualitatively superior visual results. Future research could explore

adjusting the regularization coefficients, which might improve the FID metric, and validation on

additional benchmark datasets.

15

References

[1] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein GAN. 2017. arXiv: 1701.

07875 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875.

[2] Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon.

ILVR: Conditioning Method for Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. 2021. arXiv: 2108.
02938 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.02938.

[3] Nikita Gushchin, Alexander Kolesov, Alexander Korotin, Dmitry Vetrov, and Evgeny Bur-

naev. Entropic Neural Optimal Transport via Diffusion Processes. 2023. arXiv: 2211.01156
[cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01156.

[4] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochre-

iter. GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium.

2018. arXiv: 1706.08500 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08500.

[5] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. 2020.

arXiv: 2006.11239 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239.

[6] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the Design Space

of Diffusion-Based Generative Models. 2022. arXiv: 2206 . 00364 [cs.CV]. url: https :

//arxiv.org/abs/2206.00364.

[7] Taeksoo Kim, Moonsu Cha, Hyunsoo Kim, Jung Kwon Lee, and Jiwon Kim. Learning to

Discover Cross-Domain Relations with Generative Adversarial Networks. 2017. arXiv: 1703.
05192 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.05192.

[8] Alexander Korotin, Daniil Selikhanovych, and Evgeny Burnaev. Neural Optimal Transport.

2023. arXiv: 2201.12220 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12220.

[9] Weijian Luo, Tianyang Hu, Shifeng Zhang, Jiacheng Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Zhihua Zhang.

Diff-Instruct: A Universal Approach for Transferring Knowledge From Pre-trained Diffusion

Models. 2024. arXiv: 2305.18455 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18455.

[10] Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano

Ermon. SDEdit: Guided Image Synthesis and Editing with Stochastic Differential Equations.

2022. arXiv: 2108.01073 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.01073.

[11] Taesung Park, Alexei A. Efros, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. “Contrastive Learning

for Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation”. In: CoRR abs/2007.15651 (2020). arXiv: 2007.
15651. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15651.

16

[12] Denis Rakitin, Ivan Shchekotov, and Dmitry Vetrov. Regularized Distribution Matching

Distillation for One-step Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation. 2024. arXiv: 2406.14762
[cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14762.

[13] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon,

and Ben Poole. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations.

2021. arXiv: 2011.13456 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.13456.

[14] Xuan Su, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Dual Diffusion Implicit Bridges

for Image-to-Image Translation. 2023. arXiv: 2203.08382 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.

org/abs/2203.08382.

[15] Tianwei Yin, Michaël Gharbi, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, Fredo Durand, William T.

Freeman, and Taesung Park. One-step Diffusion with Distribution Matching Distillation.

2024. arXiv: 2311.18828 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18828.

[16] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The Un-

reasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric. 2018. arXiv: 1801.03924
[cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.03924.

[17] Min Zhao, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. EGSDE: Unpaired Image-to-Image Trans-

lation via Energy-Guided Stochastic Differential Equations. 2022. arXiv: 2207.06635 [cs.CV].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06635.

[18] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Unpaired Image-to-Image

Translation using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks. 2020. arXiv: 1703.10593 [cs.CV].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10593.

17

