FEDERAL STATE AUTONOMOUS EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
FOR HIGHER PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION
NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
School of Foreign Languages
 

Vasileva Elena Stanislavovna
LINGUISTIC CREATIVITY IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE RESTAURANT DISCOURSE: ON THE EXAMPLE OF NONCE WORDS
BACHELOR’S THESIS
Field of study: 45.03.02 Linguistics
Degree programme: Foreign Languages and Intercultural Communication



 Supervisor
Doctor of Philological Sciences
 Elena V. Styrina








Moscow, 2025
Table of contents
Introduction 
Researchers have become increasingly interested in the study of linguistic creativity in various realms, such as discourse analysis, pragmatics, and sociolinguistics. Linguistic creativity is defined as the ability of an individual to apply innovative language techniques and strategies to effectively communicate ideas (Galkina, 2011). 
Scholars have concentrated on various aspects of linguistic creativity in different types of discourse. Techniques of linguistic creativity have been thoroughly examined in media (Stroinea, 2021; Thurlow, 2014) and fictional (Bennui, 2013; Feshchenko, 2021) discourse. Some researchers have concentrated on linguistic creativity in advertising (Mensah & Ndimele, 2014), cinematic (Zykova, 2021), and parliamentary discourse (Tsakona, 2012). 
Speaking of the tools of linguistic creativity, Langlotz (2006), Ermakova and Prokopova (2016), and Stepanova (2020) have focused more on phraseological units, whereas Nagornaya (2019), Kövecses (2019), and Taimur (2022) have studied metaphors as a fundamental method for achieving linguistic creativity. However, the notion of nonce words, or occasional words, as a mechanism of linguistic creativity remains underinvestigated. Nonce words are mostly examined from the perspectives of translation (Mymrina & Vaseeva, 2014), grammar (Nedelcheva, 2021), sound symbolism (Kumagai & Kawahara, 2022), and semantics (Mamadalieva, 2024). Moreover, scholars have analysed nonce words in several types of discourse, including fictional discourse (Ieșeanu, 2017), political internet discourse (Chetina, 2021), and tourism discourse (Geronik & Samarina, 2018). Nevertheless, little attention has been paid to linguistic creativity of nonce words in restaurant discourse.
The purpose of the study is to fill this research gap by examining how nonce words contribute to linguistic creativity in English language restaurant discourse, particularly in restaurant reviews.
In order to fulfil the aim of the study, the following research questions have been addressed: 
What are the peculiarities of restaurant discourse?
What functions do nonce words perform to achieve linguistic creativity of the English language restaurant discourse?
What is the most productive pattern of nonce word formation used in English language restaurant reviews?
The theoretical and practical implications of this research may enhance the understanding of the role nonce words play in fostering linguistic creativity in English language restaurant discourse. In addition, they may help to deepen knowledge of the use of effective mechanisms of word formation and stylistic means in real speech.


CHAPTER 1. THEORETICAL ASPECTS OF LINGUISTIC CREATIVITY
1.1. Definition of Creativity and Linguistic Creativity
Before considering the concept of linguistic creativity, it is worth addressing the notion of creativity in general. For a long time, the term “creativity” has been analysed in a variety of disciplines, primarily in the fields of psychology and art. Guilford (1986) examined this subject in the realm of psychology and defined creativity as a psychological phenomenon. According to him, creativity is a way of thinking that transcends traditional problem-solving and involves the ability to reframe and reinterpret data in ways that produce original and novel solutions (Guilford, 1986). Guilford (1986) distinguished six crucial elements of divergent thinking that foster creativity:
Flexibility: the ability to switch between several kinds of concepts. Flexible thinkers may propose different classifications for the same thing, such as practical, artistic, or social applications.
Fluency: the capacity to produce a wide range of concepts or answers (e.g., suggesting several uses for a paperclip exhibits fluency).
Originality: generating with fresh, original ideas. People who display originality may offer unusual answers that differ from conventional ones.
Sensitivity: recognising opportunities and problems that are often disregarded.
Elaboration: the ability to provide concepts with more specific details (e.g., explaining how a paperclip could be used as a sculptural tool).
Redefinition: the process of approaching well-known objects or issues in novel ways in order to foster creative solutions.
According to Simonton (2012), creativity is originality when it is appropriate. Therefore, for a concept to be considered genuinely “creative”, it must be both novel and suitable for the context. Ilyin (2009) defines creativity as the capacity to be imaginative, to come up with innovative concepts and unique solutions, and to break away from conventional thought patterns. One of the main approaches to analysing creativity is to divide it into four categories, or the Four Ps (MacKinnon, 1970; Odena & Welch, 2009; Stein, 1963): 
Person: the individual that is creative. 
Process: what the individual does in order to be creative.
Product: the final product of the inventive process.
Press: the environment that fosters creativity. 
Nowadays, there are various classifications of creativity types:
“Historical” and “personal” types of creativity are distinguished based on the extent of their impact on culture and society (Boden, 1994).
Creativity is separated into artistic, intellectual, and entrepreneurial based on the areas of knowledge and activity (Feldman et al., 1995; Sternberg & Lubart, 1999).
Based on the related types of intelligence, Gardner (1988) distinguishes seven categories of creativity: musical, spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, linguistic, logical-mathematical, interpersonal, and intrapersonal intelligence.
The classification proposed by Gardner (1988) allows us to discuss linguistic creativity. The notion of linguistic creativity has been extensively studied in recent years (Kiose, 2021; Nagornaya, 2019; Taimur, 2022; Zykova, 2017). Since it is a relatively new field of study, multiple definitions and theories of linguistic creativity have been developed, reflecting various viewpoints and areas of interest in this realm. 
One of the leading linguists considering linguistic creativity is Chomsky (2003), who stated that even though language rules are already established, there is no limit to how these principles might be applied. He emphasises that even the usage and interpretation of words can involve creativity. However, Sampson (2016) does not consider such constrained norms to be creative; rather, they are simply productive units that lack linguistic innovation. He makes a distinction between what he refers to as F-creativity and E-creativity, where F stands for “fixed”, and E for “extending” or “enlarging”. “F-creative” activities are those that typically yield examples sourced from a known and fixed (albeit infinitely large) range, while “E-creative” activities are those that typically generate examples that broaden the understanding of potential outputs of the activity. The invention of new words based on existing patterns is also referred to as F-creativity. For example, using the suffix -er to produce the new term ‘mansplainer’ (someone who mansplains). On the contrary, E-creativity is what happens when someone deviates from the established norms and performs something that is not covered by the limited set of regulations (Sampson, 2016).
Other scholars foreground transformation of new language units in terms of linguistic creativity as well. Zykova (2017) defines linguistic creativity as the ability to produce a variety of linguistic signs that are based on conceptual frameworks drawn from both individual and collective perceptions of the world. This phenomenon facilitates the evolution of language and its communicative adaptability within pragmatically driven discourse. During this process, fundamental forms of language signs may undergo various transformations, being modified in response to communicative needs (Zykova, 2017). Nagornaya (2019) similarly outlines the ability of newly produced linguistic units to effectively address specific communicative objectives, fully expressing the intended meaning, and foster language development by providing a new framework for the verbalisation of particular phenomena.
Based on the above-mentioned definitions and explanations, several characteristics of linguistic creativity can be identified. First of all, linguistic creativity enables the formation of a pragmatically oriented discourse in which the speaker must both communicate new meanings and use discursive forms that are more effective in resolving communicative tasks. Secondly, linguistic creativity requires alteration of conventional usage, which helps to restructure the language system. It is these elements that draw the attention of the information recipient and have a more powerful pragmatic effect (Belyaevskaya, 2022). Thirdly, linguistic creativity relies on the inherent possibilities within the language system, meaning it is fundamentally systemic.
However, according to Belyaevskaya (2022), such features of linguistic creativity as systematicity and novelty, or unusualness, suggest that this phenomenon must somehow be related to the linguistic norm. Linguistic norm is described as a compilation of the most consistent conventional implementations of the language system, chosen and solidified during social interactions (Linguistic norm, n.d.). It is connected with the literary language and can change, but at the same time remains within its framework. Hence, Belyaevskaya (2022) emphasises that the concept of admissibility is crucial to comprehending the norm. Given that the linguistic norm is subject to variation, the question of what changes to the standard use qualify as “creative” arises. Answering this question, Belyaevskaya (2022) identifies several types of unit combinations:
recurrent combinations – combinations that are common in speech implementation and correlate with systemic patterns (e.g., blue eyes);
possible (virtual) combinations – combinations that follow the systemic norms of combinability are not very common due to the low probability of a situation (e.g., sea ​​green eyes);
admissible combinations – combinations that relate to improbable circumstances, although possible in theory (e.g., golden eyes);
inadmissible combinations – combinations that contradict current  language rules of compatibility and are not utilised in discourse (e.g., checkered eyes).
	Thus, Belyaevskaya (2022) takes normativity into account and describes linguistic creativity as evaluating the dynamic potential of the language system throughout the speaker’s discursive activity while simultaneously recognising the potential limits for norm expansion. This definition serves as the foundation for this paper’s analysis of the concept of linguistic creativity.

1.2 Types of Linguistic Creativity
The following types of linguistic creativity can be distinguished in dichotomous pairs: “individual – collective” (Iriskhanova, 2004), “linguistic – stylistic” (Vinokur, 2016), “universal – discursively determined” (Zykova & Kiose, 2020), “anomalous and usual” (Radbil, 2006).
The subject of linguistic creativity is one of the criteria for differentiating between individual and collective (social) linguistic creativity (Iriskhanova, 2004). Individual linguistic creativity reflects each person’s distinct abilities to attain linguistic creativity. This could involve the intentional violation of linguistic rules in one’s own writing, using unconventional linguistic techniques, or developing new language units. Iriskhanova (2004) states that the understanding of linguistic creativity is evolving from an individual to a social one, which is reinforced by the theory of intertextuality. In this theory, meaning is created as a process and outcome of the interaction of the authors’ and readers’ intentions, with the text itself serving as the real subject of creative activity. The social nature of linguistic creativity is affirmed in the theory of speech acts as well, which introduces the idea of collective purpose as a social cognitive structure directed at the collaborative formation of meanings.
Depending on the specificity of its implementation, linguistic creativity can be categorised into two types: universal and discursively determined (Zykova & Kiose, 2020). Universal linguistic creativity has generic criterion and manifestations and is intrinsic to all types of discourse. It is defined as the process of developing new, distinct linguistic units and altering the connections among them in order to drastically update and change the language system (Sokolova, 2021). Discursively determined linguistic creativity is characteristic of certain types of discourse and manifests itself as a renewal of their microstructure through the active use of linguistic means borrowed from other types of discourse, primarily artistic and poetic ones (Sokolova, 2021). This is a result of the sender’s intentions in a particular communicative situation, which are to enhance the efficacy of the message and achieve the main objectives of the discourse.
Vinokur (2016) distinguishes between stylistic and linguistic innovation. She emphasises that in the process of stylistic innovation, the set of linguistic means associated with the norms of using a particular style of speech is updated. In this case, it is not the language itself that changes but only the norms of its use. Linguistic innovation, meanwhile, is regarded as the creation of such language means that are not based on the current tradition and are added to the broad stock of linguistic expression options as something entirely new.
Radbil (2006) defines usual and anomalous usages of language in the context of the linguistic norm. According to him, the usual refers to linguistic phenomena that comply with established norms and rules of the language. The anomalous, on the contrary, is described as a deviation from linguistic or textual norms that may be logically justified, meet communicative requirements, be semantically relevant, and pragmatically successful. What is considered anomalous in one setting could be viewed as normal in another, demonstrating that abnormality is always relative and defined within a certain starting point. It is also important to distinguish between linguistic anomalies, which are common speech mistakes that are linked to ignorance or a lack of awareness of the standard, and nonce words as linguistic anomalies, which are intentional violations of the norm. Additionally, Radbil (2006) underscores that the concepts of the usual and the anomalous are not completely opposite. If anomalous forms are frequently used and embraced by society, they may eventually become usual. Thus, the interplay between these two categories is a part of the process of language evolution.
Overall, modern theories of linguistic creativity are united by the recognition of the complexity of the mechanisms underlying the creation of new meanings in language, the impossibility of programming them algorithmically, as well as the dependence of linguistic creativity on human thinking.

1.3 Mechanisms of Linguistic Creativity
To better understand how linguistic creativity contributes to the dynamism and development of the language system, it is necessary to consider the mechanisms of linguistic creativity. Kolchina (2024) identifies three main mechanisms of linguistic creativity: morphological, semantic, and syntactic. Litvishko et al. (2022) add lexical and graphic techniques to the list. 
Speaking of morphological mechanisms of linguistic creativity, it is worth mentioning that there is a continuous discussion among scholars about the difference between morphological productivity and creativity (Bauer, 2001). Morphological productivity is regulated by rules, resulting in predictable outcomes (e.g., deriving nouns from native or Latin-based adjectives using the suffix -ness). In contrast, morphological creativity produces unpredictable results without adhering to the established rules, as demonstrated by clipping (e.g., autobus → bus; Elizabeth → Liz). Simplexes, or monomorphemic words, such as blends, acronyms, back-formations, shortenings, and half-compounds (compounds with an empty morpheme), are considered to be the product of morphological creativity, while their formation is regarded as the first distinct form of creativity that can be identified (Konieczna, 2012). Kolchina (2024) outlines the process of creating new words by adding affixes to word roots and broadening the vocabulary as a prime illustration of morphological creativity in English. For example, Lewis Carroll's “frabjous” from “Jabberwocky” combines “fabulous” and “joyous” to express happiness. This illustrates how complex emotions can be represented and captured through morphological processes. Thus, the study of morphological creativity advances knowledge of vocabulary expansion, language growth, and the creation of specialised terminology (Copca, 2014).
Semantics, the study of meanings and the connections between language units, enables the creation and interpretation of new linguistic forms through the analysis of words, phrases, and signs in particular context (Kolchina, 2024). The theory of mental spaces, which are areas for information generation and integration, has not only clarified important aspects of the language reference problem, but also provided a cognitive perspective on meaning and meaning production (Fauconnier, 1994). According to the theory, meanings are derived from values, roles, relations, and elements that constitute a conceptual domain known as a “mental space”. The formation, integration, and connection of these mental spaces allow human minds to easily construct meaning, where the veracity of a statement is the result of a broader process combining language, context, and cognition. Mental space, particularly what is referred to as conceptual integration or blending, is one of the main mechanisms of linguistic creativity (Fauconnier & Turner, 1998). Conceptual blending is a cognitive process in which the speaker projects specific elements and relations from one familiar mental space to the other, assuming that both spaces are activated. Numerous lexical formations are instances of the linguistic creativity of mental representations. The abundance of compound noun phrases, primarily complex nominals, where the blending of conceptual structures is anchored in metonymy and metaphor, serves as an example.
Metaphor serves as a foundational element mechanism of both semantic and lexical linguistic creativity, functioning as a vital conceptual tool that reflects deeper cognitive processes (Lakoff & Johnson 2008). According to cognitive research, metaphors work by way of systematic mental processes that allow people to comprehend and understand abstract ideas by projecting them onto more specific contexts. These mappings help to convey knowledge by enabling the conceptualisation of intangible ideas through real-life experiences. For example, in the sentence: “You light my morning light with burning love”, the concept of ‘love’ is projected onto physically perceived ‘heat’ (Evans & Green, 2006).
Moving on to lexical techniques of linguistic creativity, Litvishko et al. (2022) highlights the use of professionalisms, terms, and neologisms in a changed meaning, as well as the active implementation of jargon, slang words and phraseological units. A wide range of lexical stylistic devices, such as allusion, irony, antithesis, contrast, gradation, parallelism, and stylistic shift, actualise linguistic creativity (Litvishko et al., 2022). Another peculiar lexical tool of linguistic creativity is language play. Language play is a particular type of speech activity that involves using stylistic strategies to produce witty and humorous statements and speech patterns (Skovorodnikov, 2014). It refers to the intentional violation of speech and language rules in order to fulfill such functions as to amuse oneself and the other person, enrich the language system, and convey meanings that are otherwise forbidden for a variety of reasons (Sannikov, 2022).
Syntactic creativity is the capacity to create original sentence structures that follow grammatical rules and successfully communicate intended meanings (Carter, 2015). Syntax enables the modification of conventional sentence structures to provide room for new words or express creative concepts. Scholars outline such means of syntactic creativity as parallel and elliptical structures and syntactic intensifiers (Kiose, 2021).
Graphic techniques of linguistic creativity include motivated violation of spelling and punctuation norms, code mixing, and colour highlighting. Spelling and punctuation rules are intentionally broken to establish credibility, mimic spoken language, and intensify the emotional effect on the reader. Code switching techniques such as increased line spacing, capitalisation, and colour variations are used to better structure information, highlight key elements, and create an emotional background (Litvishko et al., 2022).  
In this paper, nonce words, being the mechanism of morphological creativity, are the primary source of analysis. They are employed by authors to convey an emotionally charged evaluation, draw readers’ attention to specific facts or phenomena, and illustrate particular attributes, feelings, or appearances. Additionally, nonce words can be used to communicate irony and self-irony (Melkaeva, 2022). As for occasional word combinations, figures of speech and literary tropes are used to form them: metaphorical transfer (summer’s pride), epithet (ruby tears), metonymic transfer (wondrous ear), oxymoron (mortal birth), and periphrasis (windows of the morning) (Rudinskas, 2021).

CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL ASPECTS OF NONCE WORDS
2.1 Notion of Nonce Words and Neologisms 
Nonce words, or occasional words, are one of the sources of linguistic creativity. Before analysing differences between a nonce word and a neologism, the definition of “nonce words” should be provided.
The term “nonce words” was initially proposed by Feldman (1957). According to him, a nonce word is a word derived from a low-productive or unproductive linguistic model, and constructed for a particular occasion, either for an artistic purpose or everyday use. Similarly, Vinogradov (2006) describes occasional words as unique word formations made by individual authors using unexpected or unproductive word-formation patterns. As opposed to mere neologisms, they serve a purpose of characterisation. The distinction between neologisms and nonce words has been studied widely.
Agaronyan (1972) states that nonce words and neologisms are formed by various factors. According to her, neologisms are produced for nominative reasons, such as the necessity to name a novel thing, phenomena, etc. On the contrary, occasionalisms typically originate for expressive stylistic purposes (Agaronyan, 1972). Nonce words are considered to be the creations of particular authors and facts of speech that originate from the context and the goal of the utterance; they are rarely utilised outside of these contexts, whereas neologisms are novel terms and facts of language that arise from the communicative demands (Holtvian & Severynchuk, 2015). The overall meaning of an occasional word, which is complicated and not equal to the sum of its constituent parts, is fully realised in the context, whereas neologisms can be used and understood outside of its original context (Eliseeva, 1984). Moreover, dictionaries reflecting the current status of vocabulary eventually include neologisms that have evolved into linguistic units, while nonce words are not registered in dictionaries (Moskaleva, 2008).
Thus, taking into account various aspects of nonce words, the following characteristics can be identified (Lykov, 1976; Nedelcheva, 2021): 
nonce words are intended to accomplish particular goals in a given circumstance;
it is unpredictable how nonce words occur;
unlike neologisms, which gradually lose their novelty, nonce words are fresh and distinctive to readers and listeners;
occasional words are produced during the speech act itself, in contrast to the repetition of a language unit in its completed form; 
nonce words belong to a specific author;
nonce words are functionally ‘disposable’. However, the fact that other authors have used the same occasional word does not refute this feature; 
nonce words are naturally highly expressive because of their novelty and freshness of perception.
It is also worth mentioning why authors are motivated to create such individualised verbal formations. Scholars suggest several reasons for the usage of occasional words (Babenko, 1997; Geronik & Samarina, 2018):
the author’s intention to convey an idea concisely (nonce words can substitute a phrase or a sentence);
the requirement to explain ideas precisely, for which other words may not be enough;
the necessity of highlighting one's attitude towards the speech topic, providing it with one’s personal traits, and evaluating;
the desire to avoid tautology;
the intention to deautomatise perception by highlighting a word’s semantics through its distinctive form.
Nonce words frequently occur for multiple reasons at the same time rather than just one (Babenko, 1997).
Therefore, neologisms are new words that are fixed in the language, while occasional words, which are employed only in certain situations and at specific times, have the status of facts of speech rather than of language. The main distinction between neologisms and nonce words is that the former do not claim to become established in the language or to enter common usage, they merely serve a particular context, circumstance, or speaking situation.

2.2 Classification of Nonce Words 
Linguists categorise nonce words using two primary criteria:
the degree of occasionality; 
structure.
Babenko (1997) differentiates between three levels of occasionality according to the degree of interpretive difficulty and deviation from the derivational norm. First-degree nonce words are typical linguistic constructions that are entirely composed in accordance with the derivational principles in contemporary literary language. While occasional words of the second degree are somewhat non-standard language units, their production does not result in deviations from the derivational norm that make semantic interpretation challenging. Nonce words of the third degree are entirely non-standard and completely occasional constructions that deviate significantly from the derivational norm and have complicated semantic interpretations. Even among occasional words, such constructions frequently lack analogies. 
Based on the structure of nonce words, the following types are commonly distinguished in the theory of occasionality (Babenko, 1997; Kabanova & Korneeva, 2021): phonetic, lexical, grammatical, semantic and occasional combinations of words.
Phonetic nonce words occur when an author introduces a novel sound complex, presuming that it conveys specific semantics derived from the phonetic meanings of its constituent sounds (e.g., oohed, mwahahaha). Lexical occasional words are a type of nonce words that are usually generated by combining multiple common bases and affixes, either in compliance with or in contradiction to the word-formation norm (e.g., pincerlike, mangoblin). Although morphemes that are already in the language make up the new formation, the combination of morphemes – rather than the morphemes themselves – is what makes the newly formed word really novel. Grammatical nonce words are structures where grammatical form and lexical semantics clash from a usage perspective (e.g., beeth (=booth), smole (= smiled)). Semantic occasional words occur from the establishment of contextual meanings that dramatically alter the semantics of the initial lexeme utilised in an artistic context (e.g., There, beyond the forests, the entire region hunches and pulls – to earn money with your own labor). Since practically every aesthetically charged term in a figurative text is defined by semantic increments, it is far more challenging to describe the spectrum of semantic nonce words than lexical or grammatical ones. Occasional word combinations show a confluence of lexemes that are incompatible in usage because they violate the law of semantic agreement caused by the lack of shared semes in their lexical meanings (e.g., colorless melancholy) (Babenko, 1997; Khromykh, 2016).
Apart from these dimensions, Khanpira (1972) also identifies phraseological occasional units. Occasional phrases that come from set expressions and are generated by manipulating the relationship between the original phraseological base and the derived occasional combination (Khanpira, 1972). Konopleva (2009) categories all phraseological unit transformations into three groups:
modifications that alter meaning of the phraseological units without changing their structural integrity: phraseological pun, violation of stylistic distribution;
transformations that provide innovations to the content of phraseological units by altering their structure: replacement of component(s), addition of component(s), break, wedging, ellipsis;
сomplex modifications: extended metaphor, phraseological allusion, and phraseological repetition.

2.3 Nonce Words Formation Patterns
There are various ways to create nonce words, and sometimes these processes overlap. Nonetheless, the following main techniques of their creation are identified: affixation, compounding, conversion, clipping, and blending (Ratih & Gusdian, 2018). 
Affixation, one of the most productive word-formation patterns in English, is the process of appending affixes to a base or root word to generate a new term (Plag, 2018). Depending on the place where the affix is ​​attached to the base/root of the word, the following types of affixation are distinguished: prefixation, suffixation, infixation, and circumfixation. Adding a morpheme before the base is known as prefixation (e.g., il- + legal→ illegal). Prefixes in English usually change the meaning of a word without altering its grammatical class (Plag, 2018). Conversely, suffixation is the addition of a morpheme following the base (e.g., read + -er → reader). According to Bauer (2017), suffixes are quite effective in English and frequently transform words from one class to another, such as a verb to a noun. Infixation, which is uncommon in English but frequent in languages like Tagalog, is the insertion of a morpheme into the base word (e.g., ‘abso-blooming-lutely’) (Yu, 2007). In circumfixation, morphemes are concurrently attached before and after the base (e.g., afro + futur(e) + ism → afrofuturism) (Ratih & Gusdian, 2018). 
Compounding is the process of creating a new word by combining two or more bases with or without linking parts or inflectional markers (Bauer, 2017). Compounds are categorised by scholars according to various aspects including their structure and semantics. 
Based on their structure, compounds can be divided into three primary types: closed, hyphenated, and open compounds. Closed compounds are represented as singular words (e.g., ‘sunflower’). Hyphenated compounds are connected by hyphens (e.g., ‘state-of-the-art’). Two or more consecutive words in a sentence can be joined to produce a novel unit with new lexical, semantic, and syntactic functions through the use of hyphenation. It is preferred to hyphenate compounds in the attributive position to avoid ambiguity (Sun & Baayen, 2021). Open compounds are written as separate words (e.g., high school) (Lieber et al., 2021).
The apparent formal simplicity of compounds seems to conceal significant semantic complexity. Compounds can be categorised into four types based on semantic characteristics: endocentric, exocentric, copulative, and appositional (Bauer, 2017). Endocentric compounds consist of two main components: a head, an element that provides the category and core meaning of the whole word, and a modifier that imparts a certain quality to the head. A significant amount of the syntactic and semantic information in the compound is inherited from its head. Thus, the compound is a countable noun if the head is a countable noun (e.g., beer bottle), a verb if the head is a verb (e.g., deep-fry). One of the most significant systematic characteristics of English compounds is that their head is mainly situated on the right side (Plag, 2018). Exocentric compounds lack a clear head, which proceeds to be the grammatical head, and allude to something that is not directly related to its meaning. The modifier has a complicated metaphorical relationship with the head (e.g., ‘redhead’ refers to a person with red hair rather than a particular type of head). Copulative compounds are made up of equal-status elements and frequently suggest a coordination or combination of the two (e.g., ‘bittersweet’ indicates something that is both bitter and sweet). This type of compound is the one in which none of the parts is the hyponym of the other and both elements seem to be grammatical heads. Appositional compounds, on the contrary, represent hyponyms of both the components (e.g., in ‘maidservant’ it is both a type of maid and a type of servant, thus ‘maidservant’ hyponymically refers to both). Despite serving as the grammatical head, the second constituent has no particular significance as the compound’s semantic core.
The process of lexical elements changing categories without corresponding shifts in form is called conversion, or zero derivation. Conversion is especially productive in English, where nouns commonly become verbs (Google → to google) and vice versa (to increase → an increase). Sometimes adjectives can also become verbs (cool ~ to cool). Some scholars consider conversion as zero-derivation, which is the process of changing a stem by adding a phonologically null suffix (Allen, 1978; Kiparsky, 1982). Others refer to conversion as category-change or rebracketing without any accompanying affixation; in this case, the noun would only become the verb without any discernible structural alteration (Strauss, 1982; Williams, 1981).
Clipping is the process of shortening a lexeme, whether simple or complicated, while maintaining its meaning and form class. It is frequently used to adjust the stylistic level (Bauer et al., 2015). The unpredictability lies in the way the base lexeme is shortened. There are three major patterns of clipping: fore-clipping, middle-retaining clipping, and back-clipping. Fore-clipping is the process of eliminating the first syllables to form a clipped term (e.g., cello ← violoncello). Back-clipping implies deleting the final syllables to generate a clipped word (undergrad ← undergraduate). In middle-retaining clippings the middle part of the word is retained (e.g., script ← prescription) (Park, 1988).
Blending is a word formation pattern where two or more words are combined into one, resulting in blended elements being partially overlapped or clipped (e.g., brunch = breakfast + lunch). The components of a blend frequently overlap at graphically or phonologically similar sections (e.g., motel = motor + hotel). Since blends are composed of two or more content words and, like compounds, are either hyponyms of one of their components or show some sort of paradigmatic relationship between the constituents, blending can be viewed as a subtype of compounding (Beliaeva, 2019).
Scholars have examined nonce word formation patterns based on different materials and identified the most productive one. Having analysed the characteristics of neologism and nonce word creation in the English language’s lexical macrofield throughout the final three decades of the 20th and 21st centuries, Nesvetailo (2010) came to the conclusion that conversion is the most productive nonce words formation pattern, while linear ways of word formation (e.g., affixation, compounding, etc.) occupy a less significant position. The most productive word formation process of English new words in the online Oxford English dictionary over the period of 2012-2016 is affixation (Ratih & Gusdian, 2018). In English-language tourism advertising, nonce words are frequently employed, with compounding being the predominant method of their production (Geronik & Samarina, 2018). Nedelcheva (2021) has studied the highly concentrated nonce words found in Florence & Giles by John Harding and discovered that the two most frequently used word formation patterns involve conversion and compounding with entire collocations and quotation groups being transformed to nonce verbs. Meanwhile, negative adjectives and verbs are typically formed via prefixation, whereas deverbal nouns are generated by suffixation.
Thus, it is impossible to single out the most productive way of formation of new words, including nonce words; however, conversion, compounding and affixation are identified by researchers as the most frequently used ones. One of the purposes of this paper is to determine the most productive nonce word formation pattern in English-language restaurant discourse.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ASPECTS OF DISCOURSE
3.1 Definition and Typology of Discourse
The notion of discourse has been examined by scholars from different points of view. Van Dijk (1985) defines discourse as a communicative event that combines linguistic form, meaning, and action. Within this approach, the pragmatic context plays a crucial role in appropriately interpreting the discourse while also taking into consideration the numerous external factors of the situation. Such a context includes information about previous events as well as the circumstances leading up to the speaking act. Van Dijk (1985) therefore contends that discourse is a multifaceted communication phenomena that is influenced by both textual and extralinguistic elements in its formation and perception.
A communicative-functional paradigm for comprehending discourse has been developed based on this methodology. According to Schiffrin (1994), discourse consists of written or spoken statements that are connected in a meaningful and coherent manner within a particular communicative context. She underscores three main aspects of discourse: structural cohesion (grammatical, lexical, or thematically connected sequences of utterances), functional coherence (communicative function of discourse), and interactional dynamics (social interaction, encompassing shared knowledge, listener reactions, and speaker intents). 
Stepanov (1995) claims that discourse reflects linguistic and sociocultural reality, creating a unique system of language use to express a particular mentality. It is demonstrated by distinct syntactic rules, lexical standards, and grammatical structures that collectively construct a distinct “mental world”.
Overall, discourse denotes language that extends beyond individual sentences and is expressed in any form or context with a communicative purpose (Schneider & Barron, 2014). It is thought to represent social, cultural, and political values (Khursanov & Gulyamova, 2021; Mamirbaeva & Janabaeva, 2022).
Discourse categorisation remains a controversial issue. Currently, there are no standardised criteria for its classification (Bondarchuk, 2017). By its communicative purpose discourse can be categorized into transactional (information-focused) and interactional (social-focused). The goal of transactional discourse is to effectively convey factual information while emphasising precision and clarity to guarantee that the recipient fully comprehends the details; otherwise, it may lead to unfortunate outcomes (Brown & Yule, 1983). Interactional discourse, in contrast, places more emphasis on social relationships and uses language to build and preserve relationships, as in thank-you notes (Kasper, 1990). Discourses typically combine the two roles. This overlap demonstrates the dual nature of language, as social elements are incorporated into transactional exchanges and vice versa (Mebarki, 2018).
Kashkin (2004) identified three types of discourse: genre (related to the notion of the chronotope), structurally-substantive (based on social context), and structurally-formal (centered on language structure separated from text). The following criteria can be used to carry out the structurally-formal typology of discourse: the discourse participants (monologue, dialogue, polylogue), the message (oral, written, hybrid), the code (verbal, non-verbal, mixed, or creolised), and the direction of utterance (from first, second, or third person). The structurally-substantive discourse typology is linked to the referential, or social, context. It includes the communicant’s position regarding the contextual situation, which may be expressed through discussion or narration. Additionally included are the type of text based on the presenting style (description, narration, etc.), the theme reflecting the denotative link, and the domain of discursive activity (institutional or everyday). Finally, genre discourse typology is founded on the idea of chronotope, which combines time and place. Within the framework of this typology, speech genres and communicative events (exam, trial, banquet, etc.) are distinguished. Communicative events are broader than speech genres and determined by social and extralinguistic factors.  
The discursive taxonomy developed by Karasik (2002) appears to be especially thorough and pertinent to the research. He proposed reducing discourse classification to outlining three primary approaches: thematic, pragmalinguistic, and sociolinguistic. The foundation of the thematic approach is a theme criterion that integrates a number of statements into a system while taking into account a particular communication topic (Karasik, 2002). The pragmalinguistic discourse description identifies various types of communicative tonality and means of communication. Within the sociolinguistic (agentive) approach, a communicative scenario with its conditions and participants is depicted (Karasik, 2015). Distinguishing personality-oriented from status-oriented communication forms the basis of the agentive discourse description. While status-oriented discourse emerges between individuals who see one another as representatives of a specific social group with specific roles (e.g., doctor-patient, lawyer-defendant), personality-oriented discourse happens when the communication participants see each other as individuals (Karasik, 2015). Therefore, restaurant discourse with the opposing roles of the communication participants (“restaurateurs – customers/diners”, “restaurant critics/reviewers – readers”) could be attributed to status-oriented discourse. 

3.2 Restaurant Discourse
Communication concerning cooking and eating is complex, leading to diverse discussions and nutrition-related terminology. Scholars have identified several types of discourse, including culinary (Banman, 2009; Rossato, 2009), gastronomic (Cherednikova, 2011; Kositskaya & Zaytseva, 2016), culinary-gastronomic (Savelyeva & Voloshina, 2017), nutritional (Gracia-Arnaiz, 2001), and gluttonic (Olyanich, 2007). 
Among the discourses discussed, restaurant discourse should be recognised because it is the most institutionalised one and represents the professional discursive practices of those in the restaurant industry such as restaurateurs, staff, and restaurant critics (Davis, 2009). It could be defined as a communication between the agent and the customer/client with the regulated manner of functioning and established social norms that takes place within the social institution of the restaurant industry (Terentyeva et al., 2018). Agents of restaurant discourse, including restaurant critics, restaurateurs, and staff members (chefs, managers, etc.), can act as experts and advocate for public catering. The general public, as represented by potential diners, as well as members of the knowledgeable restaurant community are the clients of restaurant discourse (Pavlova, 2017).
Speaking of restaurant online discourse, it is defined as a group of specific means of communication provided by Internet technologies that are utilised to meet both linguistic and non-linguistic requirements of both restaurant personnel and customers (Terentyeva, 2015). Apart from the traditional agents of restaurant discourse, the addressers of restaurant online discourse include reviewers, journalists, and members of the blogosphere, whose credible and favourable evaluations may appear on catering facility websites. Meanwhile, website visitors (potential customers), including restaurant critics who are researching the content of the restaurant website, are the addressees of the discourse (Pavlova, 2017).
The process of converting restaurant discourse into written texts enabled the transformation of culinary items (e.g., food or taste) into intellectual goods that could be separated from their immediate context of usage and remain durable throughout time (Opazo, 2012). This trend demonstrates how food communication is still viewed as a type of leisure that plays an important part in social life, fuelled by a vast and expanding volume of gastronomic information that increasingly impacts media and public opinion.
The concept of restaurant discourse has been examined from the viewpoints of linguistic pragmatics (Shamne & Pavlova, 2019), linguaculture of food and drinking (Kozko & Pozhidaeva, 2012), critical discourse analysis (Jamieson, 2023), and genre interactions (Terentyeva et al., 2018). However, no previous research has investigated restaurant discourse from the perspective of linguistic inventiveness. 

3.3 Restaurant Reviews in the Restaurant Discourse
Researchers have become increasingly interested in restaurant reviews as the genre of restaurant discourse. It has been noticed that magazine reviews frequently disregard such factors as price, service, and chefs in favour of focussing on wine, food, and ambience. (Williamson et al., 2009). Regarding the newspaper reviews, they typically have a chronological format and include the entire dining experience, from selecting the restaurant to paying and contemplating a return visit (Hou, 2012). Nevertheless, few studies have addressed online restaurant discourse, with most previous research focussing on its genres. Popular genres include restaurant reviews published on various websites (Chik & Vásquez, 2017) and online comments made by restaurant consumers on social media (Napolitano, 2018; Pantelidis, 2010).
Having analysed American food discourse and restaurant reviews, Davis (2009) emphasises that American collective taste and gastronomic culture have been significantly shaped by restaurant reviews. In a nation lacking a single, common culinary heritage, these reviews have emerged as a distinctive form of food journalism. However, instead of providing objective evaluations of quality, restaurant reviews are thought to act as cultural mediators that uphold social hierarchies. He highlights that reviews create power by determining what constitutes authentic cultural knowledge and favouring particular dining experiences over others in accordance with fundamental social beliefs. In support of this claim, Wood (1996) points out that the majority of ‘quality’ food journals generically characterise their audience as affluent and fashionable middle class professionals.
Breur (2019) compared restaurant reviews written by professional critics, experienced consumers, and inexperienced ones. According to her, professional restaurant reviews are more structured and predictable since they are more thorough and arranged according to particular themes such as food, service, and atmosphere. Critics use their knowledge to offer arguments in favour of their opinions and useful details that are frequently absent from customer reviews. Meanwhile, there are substantial similarities between reviews from experienced and inexperienced customers. Both types of review reveal private details including the reasons for going to a restaurant, who the reviewers ate with, and if they would return. They are typically more evaluative than descriptive.
Szczygłowska (2021) examined lexical peculiarities in English restaurant reviews written by professional critics. She came to the conclusion that particular attention is paid to ingredients, demonstrating that these reviews are concerned not just with the consumption of ready-to-eat meals, but also with the dish itself and its preparation. Additionally, the study discovered a low presence of explicit evaluative expressions, which could be due to vivid descriptive terms and accompanying photos effectively conveying the critic’s opinion.
In this paper, peculiarities of nonce words in restaurant reviews published on websites and written by both professional critics and amateurs are analysed.
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS OF NONCE WORDS IN THE ENGLISH RESTAURANT DISCOURSE
4.1 Methodology
This research seeks to examine nonce words in English language restaurant discourse in terms of their level of expressiveness, word formation patterns, and functions performed to attain linguistic creativity. To achieve this goal, both qualitative and quantitative methods within content analysis were implemented. 
The linguistic material for the study was gathered from six UK and six US online blogs, magazines, and newspapers with restaurant reviews, such as Major Foodie, Brighton Restaurants Guide, The Guardian, DISH Miami, I just want to eat, The NYT using the stratified sampling method. Such search queries as “restaurant reviews UK” and “restaurant reviews USA” were used for finding relevant online restaurant review websites. Afterwards, the first few options on the search page were selected based on the availability of up-to-date restaurant reviews. From these sources, 12 UK and 12 US restaurant reviews were analysed. The reviews were chosen randomly within the period from June, 2024 to February, 2025.
For a variety of reasons, online blogs and magazines with restaurant reviews were selected for the analysis. To begin with, restaurant reviews usually utilise informal language, which encourages more creative expressions. Furthermore, reviews are a reflection of individual sensations, which fosters the formation of occasional words to characterise textures, flavours, and dining experiences. Lastly, a diverse dataset is available due to the widespread accessibility of online restaurant reviews.
The restaurant reviews found were examined for the presence of nonce words. The nonce words were gathered manually in accordance with the existing patterns of nonce word formation: affixation, compounding, conversion, and blending (Khromykh, 2016). To ensure that the collected words were not mistaken with neologisms, they were searched for in the online Cambridge Dictionary and the online Merriam-Webster Dictionary.
Mixed methods were applied in this research. Firstly, morphological analysis was used to categorise nonce words based on word formation processes. To determine the most productive word-formation pattern among the gathered words, a quantitative approach was employed. Secondly, the nonce words were classified according to the categories of restaurant discourse they describe (dishes, menu, serving, interior, etc.) within the framework of semantic analysis. All the classifications are presented in the form of comparative tables. 
Having analysed the meanings of the nonce words, the context in which they are used, as well as the stylistic devices that these words embody or in the formation of which they participate, the functions of occasional words and their role in achieving linguistic creativity were identified. Based on these functions, we attempted to distinguish between expressive and purely descriptive nonce words to determine the level of expressiveness of nonce words used in restaurant reviews.

4.2 Analysis of Restaurant Reviews Sources
The restaurant reviews selected for the analysis were written by both professional critics and amateurs. It is worth taking a closer look at the websites from which the reviews were taken.
	Speaking of the English websites, two personal food blogs, two guides, and two online magazines/newspapers were examined. Major Foodie and Gourmand Gunno Restaurant Reviews are two personal food blogs run by food enthusiasts rather than professional critics. They are dedicated to both London and international dining experiences. Brighton Restaurants Guide and The Good Food Guide are restaurant guides, however Brighton Restaurants Guide is a more casual guide focused on local Brighton restaurants and run by bloggers-amateurs, while The Good Food Guide is a reputable restaurant guide featuring expert reviewers and critics in the UK. The Guardian, an online newspaper, and Time Out, an online magazine, employ professional restaurant critics and journalists with expertise in food criticism. 
	As for the American websites, two personal food blogs, two food-focused online magazines, one online newspaper, and one online lifestyle magazine were analysed. I just want to eat and Travel Munchers are independent food blogs by food hobbyists sharing restaurant reviews, while Travel Munchers also provide travel content, highlighting global dining destinations. DISH Miami and Grub Street (a section within New York Magazine) are online magazines that cover restaurant reviews, industry news and trends. However DISH Miami, run by local food journalists, focuses on Miami’s gastronomic scene, when Grub Street is mainly concentrated on the New York restaurant industry and its writers are professional restaurant critics. Similarly, the New York Times (a national newspaper covering a wide range of topics, including news, culture, food, etc.) is primarily concerned with New York restaurants. The NYT’s restaurant review section is one of the most influential in the US due to its authoritative critics. Finally, Boca Magazine is an online lifestyle magazine written by local journalists, some of whom have expertise in the restaurant industry.
Overall, professional restaurant critics usually have backgrounds in journalism and frequently contribute to well-known publications like The Guardian, The New York Times, and Time Out. On the contrary, many blogs and smaller guides are run by food enthusiasts or freelance writers who offer a more intimate viewpoint. While amateurs more accurately represent the experience of the typical diner, professionals provide expertise and precision. 

4.3 Structural Classification of Nonce Words Used in the Restaurant Reviews
In the practical part of the work, 146 nonce words were found in restaurant reviews, 56 of which were from British reviews and 90 from American ones. To begin with, these words can be classified according to their word formation processes.
The most productive nonce word formation pattern in restaurant reviews is compounding. The nonce words identified in restaurant reviews can be categorised by 11 models of nonce word compounding with the following being the most productive ones: (proper) noun + adj; noun + Participle I; (proper) noun + Participle II;  (proper) adj + Participle II. Most of the compounds are hyphenated (e.g., citrus-delicious, sweet-but-not-too-sweet) with only one closed compound (cozycore). 
The second most productive method of nonce word formation is affixation. However, before discussing the results, it is worth defining the notion of ‘semi-affix’ as it is widely used to derive nonce words in restaurant reviews. Semi-affixes, or affixoids, are special morphemes that occupy a transitional position between lexical words and bound morphemes. They coincide in form with a free lexeme but share functional and semantic properties with derivational affixes (Booij & Hüning, 2014; Kenesei, 2007). According to Stevens (2005), the affixoid is a diachronically helpful and significant notion since it illustrates the graduality of the grammaticalization process by showing how an intermediary step is required when creating an affix from a lexeme. Scholars outline semi-prefixes, or prefixoids (e.g., eco-, over-, super-, hyper-, uber-, cyber-, mega-, mini-), and semi-suffixes, or suffixoids (e.g., -like, -friendly, -free, proof, -based, -style, -wise) (Bauer et al., 2015; Dyachkova, 2011; Plag, 2018). In this paper the terms ‘semi-prefix’ and ‘semi-affix’ are used.
Such semi-prefixes as over-, super-, hyper-, uber-, mega-, mini- as well as conventional prefixes -ex, -un are implemented by the authors of restaurant reviews to create nouns and adjectives. Semi-prefixes super- (e.g., super-delicious), uber- (e.g., uber-tender), mega- (e.g., megarestaurants) and the prefix -ex (e.g., ex-Le Gavroche) are used more often than the others.
As for suffixation, such suffixes as -y/-ey, -ish, -esque and semi-suffixes -like, -based, -friendly, -style are utilised to form adjectives. Suffixation with a semi-suffix -like is the most productive (e.g., hivelike, brasserie-like, plume-like). Further by frequency of use follow semi-suffixes -style (e.g., slushy-style, Jamaican-style) and -based (e.g., raspberry-based, tequila-based) and suffixes -y/ey (e.g., tripe-y, potatoey) and -esque (e.g., Robuchon-esque, Roman’s-esque). In the analyzed restaurant reviews, suffixation prevails over prefixation.
The two above-mentioned word formation patterns (compounding and affixation) are sometimes used in combination. In the reviews, there are two nonce words formed according to this scheme. They are non-wine-drinking (prefixation + compounding) and mustard-and-port-based (compounding + suffixation).
Another way of nonce word formation is conversion. Adjectivisation, in this case, the transition of a noun to the category of adjectives, is used as the only method of conversion (e.g., a speakeasy feel, delicatessen dishes). However, сonversion can be used in combination with other word-building techniques like compounding (Tărîţă, 2019). This could be often seen in restaurant reviews in the form of complex nominalisation, the transition of a compound to the category of nouns, and complex adjectivisation, the conversion of a compound to the category of adjectives (Nesvetailo, 2010). The only example of complex nominalisation identified in the reviews is a flavour-favourite, which is a compound adjective (a combination of a noun and an adjective) converted into a noun. Complex adjectivisation is represented by five models with noun + noun (+ noun) → adj (e.g., a comfort-food retreat, a Saturday-night-date restaurant) and adj + noun → adj (e.g., white-tablecloth service, a special-occasion restaurant) being most frequently used. It is worth noting that these converted compounds are created from collocations (comfort food, special occasion. etc.).
The final method of nonce word formation determined in restaurant reviews is blending. Here, it is used to form nouns by combining two nouns together and clipping the morpheme(s) at the beginning of the second noun (e.g., club + restaurant → clubstaurant; dance + cafeteria → danceteria).
Overall, compounding is the most frequently used nonce word formation pattern in the examined restaurant reviews (91/146 nonce words; 62%). Then follows affixation (31/146 /146 nonce words; 21%) with suffixation (19/146 nonce words; 13%) predominating over prefixation (12/146 nonce words; 8%). The third most productive method of nonce word formation is the combination of conversion and compounding (16/146 nonce words; 12%). The least used types of nonce word formation are conversion (4/146 nonce words; 3%), blending (2/146 nonce words; 1%), and combine type “affixation + compounding” (2/146 nonce words; 1%). Moreover, most of the nonce words are either adjectives or participles, hence perform the attributive function. The results are presented in Figure 1 and Table 1.

Figure 1
Distribution of Nonce Words by Word Formation Patterns 


Table 1
Structural Classification of Nonce Words



4.4 Semantic Classification of Nonce Words Used in the Restaurant Reviews
The next classification is the semantic one, within which nonce words are distributed depending on the categories of the restaurant discourse they represent. The results are demonstrated in Table 2. We have attempted to identify the following thematic categories: dish, serving, menu, interior/exterior, feeling and sensations that food evokes, chefs, diners, restaurant itself, regional influence, restaurant reviewers/critics, and pricing. 
The category to which most nonce words belong is ‘dish’. It comprises several subcategories including ingredients, flavour, texture, size/weight, colour, method of cooking, and special features. The ingredients subcategory contains the most nonce words. To form these words, the names of herbs and spices (e.g., shishito-herb, saffron-infused, rosemary-encrusted, anise-derived, clove-heavy, chili-rubbed), dairy products  (e.g., butter-glazed, butter-coated, cheddar-topped, Parmesan-aged, sausage-egg-and-cheese),  vegetables/ fruit/ berries (e.g., potatoey, pickled-beet, olive-laden, lemon-infused, roasted-yuzu, raspberry-based), sauces (e.g., mustard-sharpened, mole-drenched, yuzu-soy), alcohol (e.g., tequila-based, mustard-and-port-based), and ingredients typical for dishes of a particular culture  (e.g., miso-cured, yuzu-soy, tomatillo-salsa-slathered, mole-drenched) are used. As for the second part of these hyphenated compounds, such words as “topped, encrusted, coated, glazed” illustrate how the food is decorated on the outside (e.g., rosemary-encrusted, butter-glazed, butter-coated, cheddar-topped), while ‘infused’, ‘drenched’ and ‘soaked’ describe a dish flavoured by steeping it in a key ingredient (e.g., shishito–infused, truffle-infused, lemon-infused, mole-drenched, butterscotch-soaked). 
The second subcategory within the ‘dish’ category is flavour. Nonce words that describe taste or flavour, which is a broader term, contain such stems as “sweet, salty, spicy, tart” combined in different ways (e.g., sweet-but-not-too-sweet, sweet-salty, sweet-tart, spicy-sweet). Moreover, comparison is used to better convey the flavour (e.g., syrup-sweet, ocean-fresh). Similarly, comparison is employed to form nonce words describing size of dishes, including thickness, weight, depth, shape (e.g., Doberman-paw-sized, pebble-sized, saucer-size, cable-thin, paper-thin, light-as-air, a Mariana trench-depth, empanada-shaped), as well as texture (e.g., purée-soft, fluffy-fleshed, tripe-y) and colour of dishes  (e.g., guacamole-green, rust-coloured, winter-grey). The nonce words also reflect methods of cooking dishes (e.g., long-braised, house-fermented), in particular, manual preparation of food is emphasised (e.g., hand-pressed, hand-pulled, hand-cut), and special utensils for cooking (e.g., dry-wok, grill-warm). 
Then follows the interior category. Reviewers describes spaces (e.g.,  mini-cave, lodgelike spaces, pine-heavy interior, sandy-coloured interior, pink-hued space, window-filled dining room, mezzanine-level private rooms), furniture (e.g., plume-like chandeliers, hessian-sack cushions, a bubblegum-pink lattice, hivelike light fixtures), other interior elements (e.g., emerald-green carpet, avocado-green booths, noise-diffusing plants, a violet-leafed oxalis), and atmosphere (e.g., cozycore), often relying on comparison.
The feelings that reviewers experience from food are also described by nonce words. These sensations could be subcategorised into physical (e.g., sinus-clearing, lip-licking, tummy-rubbing, tongue-curling, hangover-curing) and emotional ones (e.g., conversation-stopping, soul-soothing), with physical sensations predominating.
Almost every restaurant review has a cultural influence, as reviews of restaurants from different cuisines of the world were considered (Chinese, British, Italian, Japanese, Jewish, American, Spanish, Mexican, etc.). This tendency is reflected in nonce words that characterise dishes (e.g., Jamaican-style barbecue, Sichuan-style lobster, Asian-fusion bites, Lowcountry-inspired breakfast), menu (e.g., European-ish menu), and decor (e.g., Mediterranean-inspired in menu and decor). 
Apart from the above-mentioned categories, it is also worth commenting on the references to popular restaurants, chefs, and brands (e.g., Robuchon-esque serving, ex-Dabbous chef, ex-Le Gavroche, Roman’s-esque menu, Mott’s-y combination, Jackson Pollock-like splatters of salsa roja). For example, Robuchon-esque serving refers to a unique plating technique influenced by the renowned French chef Joël Robuchon and marked by simplicity and elegance. Dabbous and Le Gavroche are the names of famous London restaurants, Roman’s is an Italian restaurant in New York, Mott’s is an American producer of fruit juices, and Jason Pollock is an American abstract expressionist painter. To understand these references, a reader of restaurant reviews must have a fairly rich socio-cultural background, including knowledge of the restaurant industry. 
Table 2
Semantic Classification of Nonce Words
4.5 Functions of Nonce Words Used in the Restaurant Reviews
As a result of the analysis of nonce words in English-language restaurant discourse, namely in restaurant reviews, their functions in attaining linguistic creativity were identified. Nonce words are used by restaurant reviewers to:
facilitate the reader’s understanding by creating a comprehensible image of dishes, interior, and the restaurant itself. 
Nonce words help to convey the taste, texture, size and colour of a dish, especially of an unknown or foreign one (e.g., syrup-sweet pops of mostarda di Cremona, purée-soft refried beans, a saucer-size timballo, rust-coloured salsa roja), and interior elements (e.g., hivelike light fixtures, plume-like chandeliers, avocado-green booths) through comparison with more understandable and familiar items. Both non-food items (e.g., the emerald-green carpet, a pebble-sized morsel, ocean-fresh kelp oil, cable-thin pasta) and food items (e.g., bubblegum-pink lattice, avocado-green booths) are used for the comparison. Interestingly, sometimes more popular dishes are referred to to describe less popular ones (e.g., guacamole-green salsa verde). These nonce words, formed using suffixation and compounding, can be named similative epithets as they are both descriptive and comparative at the same time.
evoke sensory experiences including both physiological (e.g., sinus-clearing warmth; a sinus-awakening amount of Espelette pepper; a lip-licking, tummy-rubbing sense of enjoyment; caper dressing verging on the tongue-curling; hangover-curing satisfaction of packaged noodles) and psychological ones (e.g., conversation-stopping stuff, a soul-soothing bowl of broth). 
add expressiveness and imagery to the description of the dish, serving, interior, restaurant, etc. 
For example, when depicting Mole Poblano sauce, the author compares its depth to the Mariana Trench, which is a hyperbole (It (Mole Poblano) has a Mariana trench-depth). Moreover, reviewers use occasional words as part of metaphors such as in “this waiter-narrated ballad of salsa and chilli and mole”, where a dining experience and service is viewed as a song or a poem narrated by the waiter. Transferred epithet is one more stylistic device employed by authors of restaurant reviews to form nonce-words. For example, when talking about young and experienced chefs, one of the reviewers uses a transferred epithet “gray-bearded excellence” to refer to the seasoned chefs (gray-bearded excellence is excellence of a special kind). Here, the nonce word ‘gray-bearded’ is shifted, or transferred, from the noun ‘chef’ it intended to describe to the noun ‘excellence’, which proves that this occasional word is a transferred epithet. Besides, the authors turn to legendary figures both in the restaurant industry (e.g., Robuchon-esque serving refers to the famous French chef Joël Robuchon) and in others, especially in the arts. In one of the analysed reviews, the critic mentions an American abstract expressionist painter Jackson Pollock (Jackson Pollock-like splatters of salsa roja, hoja santa and an oozing egg). Here, the serving of a dish is compared with the artist’s peculiar painting style; hence, the dish is to some extent equated to a piece of art.
convey the author’s personal feelings and perceptions. 
For example, taste is subjective, therefore such nonce words as sweet-but-not-too-sweet, super-delicious, not-overly sweet, super-delicious, flavour-favourite reflect solely personal perception of the taste.
concisely and succinctly express an idea.
Nonce words enable reviewers to enhance the semantic richness of the text by shortening it. For example, instead of saying “a restaurant that is suitable for a date on a Saturday night” the author created a nonce word within the collocation “Saturday-night-date restaurant”, which is more laconic and expressive. 

4.6 Expressiveness of Nonce Words Used in the Restaurant Reviews
Based on whether a nonce word performs an expressive function or not, we attempt to distinguish between expressive and purely descriptive ones. Expressive nonce words have a higher level of imagery; hence, they either represent or take part in creating stylistic devices. Among the analysed occasional words, metaphors (e.g., a mini-cave for a pre-dinner drink; this waiter-narrated ballad of salsa and chilli and mole), epithets, including transferred (e.g., gray-bearded excellence; lip-licking, tummy-rubbing sense of enjoyment) and similative ones (e.g., ocean-fresh kelp oil, light-as-air Victoria Sandwich), and hyperbole (e.g., It has a Mariana trench-depth) can be outlined.
Similative epithets make up the majority of the expressive nonce words. They are used to describe dishes and their size (e.g., Doberman-paw-sized scallop, a pebble-sized morsel, a saucer-size timballo, cable-thin noodles, paper-thin crudo), colour (e.g., guacamole-green salsa verde, winter-grey tortilla, the rust-coloured salsa roja), texture (e.g., purée-soft refried beans), as well as to illustrate interior elements (e.g., a bubblegum-pink lattice, the emerald-green carpet, hivelike light fixtures, lodgelike spaces) through comparison.
Moreover, nonce words formed in a non-standard way can be classified as expressive. These include words formed by compounding three or more morphemes into one word (e.g., sweet-but-not-too-sweet, Doberman-paw-sized, mustard-and-port-based) or adding a derivational suffix to a proper noun in the possessive case (e.g., Mott’s-y, Roman’s-esque). Besides, evaluative nonce words (e.g., super-delicious, uber-reasonable, Instagram-worthy) can be considered expressive. In addition, references to renowned chefs (e.g., a Robuchon-esque serving of velvety and buttery mash), restaurants (e.g., an experienced ex-Dabbous chef, at the fabled ex-Le Gavroche, Roman’s-esque menu), and artists (e.g., Jackson Pollock-like splatters of salsa roja, hoja santa and an oozing egg) can be added to the list of the expressive nonce words.
	However, most of the nonce words in the analysed reviews can be named purely descriptive, that is, they are not so much expressive as they perform a descriptive and nominating function. For example, in such collocations as a raspberry-based mocktail or a West Indian-inspired pop-up we simply receive information about the composition of the drink and the style of the temporary establishment. There is no hidden meaning or comparison. Besides, such nonce words often contain recurrent morphemes: -based (e.g., tequila-based, raspberry-based), -infused (e.g., shishito–infused, truffle-infused, lemon-infused, sage-infused, saffron-infused), -inspired (e.g., Mediterranean-inspired, West Indian-inspired, Lowcountry-inspired, Neapolitan-inspired), -style (e.g., Jamaican-style, Sichuan-style), -focused (e.g., Seafood-focused, Southern-focused). 
Thus, descriptive occasional words (78/146 nonce words; 53%) prevail over expressive ones (68/146 nonce words; 47%), albeit not to a significant extent. The results are shown in Figure 2 and Table 3. Moreover, despite the low level of expressiveness of the descriptives, they still contribute to it due to their rather unusual visual form (hyphens attract readers’ attention). Consequently, it can be concluded that nonce words are very productive in creating and/or enhancing linguistic creativity in English language restaurant discourse.

Figure 2
The Ratio of Expressive Nonce Words to Descriptive



Table 3
Comparative Table of Expressiveness of Nonce Words


Results and Discussion
	In the analytical part of the study, 146 nonce words from 12 UK and 12 US restaurant reviews were examined, with nonce words being more common in the American reviews (56 occasional words in British and 90 in American reviews). 
The collected words were analysed using mixed methods. Morphological analysis was applied to classify the nonce words based on their word formation patterns, while a quantitative approach was used to determine the most productive ones. Then, the words were categorised according to the elements of restaurant discourse they describe by means of the semantic analysis. In addition, the functions of occasional words in restaurant discourse and their expressiveness were determined.
The research revealed that the most productive word formation pattern implemented by restaurant reviewers to create nonce words is compounding (90/146 nonce words; 62%), with hyphenated compounds being particularly common. The next most frequently used word formation method is affixation (31/146 nonce words; 21%) followed by the combination of conversion and compounding (17/146 nonce words; 12%). These results corroborated previous studies suggesting that the most common way to create nonce words is compounding (Geronik & Samarina, 2018). However, they do not coincide with the findings of other scholars who came to the conclusion that conversion and affixation are the most productive methods of nonce word formation (Nesvetailo, 2010; Ratih & Gusdian, 2018). In the analysed restaurant reviews, conversion is one of the least frequently used word formation patterns (4/146 nonce words; 3%).
As for the semantic analysis, nonce words describing dishes, especially ingredients, are the most numerous. The second place is occupied by occasional words of the ‘interior’ category. Having studied the meanings of occasional words and the context, their functions were determined: 1) facilitating the reader’s understanding by creating a comprehensive image; 2) evoking sensory experiences; 3) adding expressiveness and imagery to the description; 4) conveying the author’s personal feelings and perceptions; 5) expressing an idea briefly and concisely. Taking these functions into account, the nonce words were divided into expressive and purely descriptive with the descriptive ones (78/146 nonce words; 53%) prevailing over expressive (68/146 nonce words; 47%). Nevertheless, the difference is not very significant, and descriptive words also attract attention with their unusual external form, that is, they add some expressiveness to the text. Moreover, most of the expressive nonce words can be considered similative epithets, a stylistic device used to make a comparison, implying that the thing mentioned shares characteristics with another entity. Therefore, nonce words are frequently and effectively used by restaurant reviewers to achieve linguistic creativity.
This research, however, has potential limitations. The nonce words were collected from randomly selected restaurant reviews, which may not reflect a complete picture of their structural and semantic diversity. More reviews could be analysed in future studies to address this limitation and increase the generalisability of the results.

Conclusion
The aim of this paper was to analyse the linguistic creativity of nonce words in English language restaurant discourse, namely in restaurant reviews. To achieve this goal, we focused on the following objectives: to define the peculiarities of restaurant discourse; to determine the functions nonce words perform to attain linguistic creativity in this type of discourse, as well as identify the most productive patterns of nonce word formation applied in English language restaurant reviews.
In the theoretical part of the paper, we defined the notion of linguistic creativity as an assessment of the dynamic potential of the language system throughout the speaker’s discursive activity, while we recognise the potential limits for the expansion of the norm. The analysis of literature demonstrated that linguistic creativity encourages the development of the language system via the use of numerous tools. As we found out, among these tools, linguists highlight nonce words, or occasional words, which were the focus of our attention.
Based on the theoretical literature, we derived the following definition of a nonce word: it is a novel term created by an individual author, employing both productive and unproductive word formation patterns, for the purpose of characterisation. Meanwhile, a neologism, as opposed to a nonce word, performs a nominative function. As for the nonce word formation processes, scholars outline compounding, affixation, and conversion as the most frequently used.
The literature review showed that nonce words are considered to foster linguistic inventiveness in various types of discourse, one of which is restaurant discourse. Scholars view restaurant discourse as the most institutionalised type of discourse among the nutrition-related ones that reflects the professional discursive practices of restaurateurs, restaurant staff, diners, restaurant critics/reviewers, and review readers. One of the genres of restaurant discourse is restaurant reviews that are believed to function as cultural mediators, maintaining social hierarchies.
In the analytical part of the research, nonce words gathered from UK and US restaurant reviews were examined. As it was shown by the analysis of our material, the most productive ways to form occasional words in restaurant reviews are compounding, affixation, and a combination of both compounding and conversion, which partially corresponds to the findings of previous studies. Applying the semantic classification, we found that most of the nonce words characterise dishes (including their flavour, texture, and colour) and interior. Moreover, we identified the functions that nonce words perform to achieve linguistic creativity in restaurant reviews, such as facilitating the reader’s understanding by creating a comprehensive image, evoking sensory experiences, adding expressiveness and imagery to the description, conveying the author’s personal feelings, and expressing an idea concisely. Based on whether a nonce word performs an expressive function or not, we differentiated between expressive and purely descriptive occasional words and determined that the descriptive ones prevail. 
Overall, the realm of language innovation and word creation is increasingly developing, and restaurant discourse is the sphere in which linguistic creativity is particularly evident. This is caused by the fact that authors usually resort to the use of imagery, stylistic devices, and unusual words and collocations to better describe taste, smell, and physical and emotional sensations. Studying such mechanisms of linguistic creativity is crucial for linguistics as a science, as it enables us to determine how the language system can be developed, where the boundaries of the norm and deviation are, how linguistic innovations emerge, and how they are recorded in language. 
The obtained results may be applied in such educational courses as lexicology, stylistics, and discourse theory of the English language. Additionally, the study attempted to contribute to the existing research in the field of language change by examining the newly created linguistic units that potentially may be accepted and integrated into the vocabulary. As for the future research, it could compare the structural and semantic features of the use of nonce words in British and American restaurant reviews, as well as the influence of cultural factors on their formation.


References
Agaronyan, I. V. (1972). Slovoobrazovanie okkazionalizmov sushchestvitel'nykh v epistoljarnom nasledii poloviny XIX i chetverti XX vekov [Word-formation of occasional nouns in the epistolary heritage of the second half of the 19th and first quarter of the 20th centuries] [Doctoral dissertation]. Russian State Library.
Allen, M. R. (1978). Morphological investigations [Doctoral dissertation]. University of Connecticut.
Babenko, N. G. (1997). Okkazional'noe v hudozhestvennom tekste. Strukturno-semanticheskij analiz [Occasional in fiction. Structural and semantic analysis]. KGU [KSU].
Banman, P. P. (2009). Kulinarnyy diskurs [Culinary discourse]. Stavropol, Stavropolskoe knizhnoe izdatel'stvo [Stavropol book publishing house].
Bauer, L. (2001). Morphological productivity (Vol. 95). Cambridge University Press.
Bauer, L. (2017). Compounds and compounding (Vol. 155). Cambridge University Press.
Bauer, L., Lieber, R., & Plag, I. (2015). The Oxford reference guide to English morphology. Oxford University Press.
Beliaeva, N. (2019). Blending in morphology. In Oxford research encyclopedia of linguistics. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.511
Belyaevskaya, E. G. (2022). Lingvisticheskaya kreativnost': narushenie normy? [Linguistic creativity: Violation of the norm?]. Voprosy Psikolingvistiki [Issues in Psycholinguistics], 3(53), 62–73.
Bennui, P. (2013). Linguistic creativity in Thai English fiction. University of Malaya.
Boden, M. A. (1994). Précis of the creative mind: Myths and mechanisms. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17(3), 519-531.
Bondarchuk, I. A. (2017). Osnovnye podhody k tipologii diskursa [Main approaches to the typology of discourse]. Filologiya [Philology], 5(11), 8-13.
Booij, G., & Hüning, M. (2014). Affixoids and constructional idioms. Extending the Scope of Construction Grammar, 77-105.
Breur, S. (2019) A genre analysis of restaurant reviews: Differences between reviews written by professional critics, experienced consumers and inexperienced consumers [Master’s thesis]. Tilburg University.
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Discourse analysis. Cambridge University Press
Carter, R. (2015). Language and creativity: The art of common talk. Routledge.
Cherednikova, E. A. (2011). Aksiologicheskie kharakteristiki gastronomicheskogo diskursa [Axiological characteristics of gastronomic discourse]. Vestnik Moskovskogo Gosudarstvennogo Oblastnogo Universiteta. Seriya: Lingvistika [Bulletin of Moscow State Regional University. Series: Linguistics], (5), 78–82.
Chetina, M. M. (2021). Kognitivnaya model' okkazional'noj nominacii v internet-diskurse (na materiale angloyazychnyh politicheskih forumov) [Cognitive model of nonce-words formation in Internet discourse (English political forums)]. Ekonomicheskij Vektor [Economic Vector], 1(24), 5-9.
Chik, A., & Vásquez, C. (2017). A comparative multimodal analysis of restaurant reviews from two geographical contexts. Visual Communication, 16(1), 3-26.
Chomsky, N. (2003). For reasons of state. Penguin Books India.
Copca, M. (2014). Lexical productivity in English language a theoretical approach. Euromentor Journal-Studies about Education, (02), 24-29.
Davis, M. (2009). A taste for New York: Restaurant reviews, food discourse, and the field of gastronomy in America. New York University.
Dyachkova, E. S. (2011). Polusuffiksy i obrazovaniya s nimi v sovremennom angliyskom yazyke [Semi-suffixes and formations with them in modern English] [Doctoral dissertation]. Altai State Pedagogical Academy.
Eliseeva, V. V. (1984). Avtorskii okkazionalizm kak sredstvo sozdaniya komicheskogo effekta (v pragmaticheskom aspekte) [Authorial occasionalism as a means of creating a comic effect (in the pragmatic aspect)] [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. SaintPetersburg State University.
Ermakova, E. N., & Prokopova, M. V. (2016). Transformaciya frazeologicheskih edinic v yazyke SMI: lingvokreativnyj potencial yazyka sportivnogo kommentatora [Transformation of phraseological units in the language of the media: the linguo-creative potential of the language of a sports commentator]. Vestnik Kostromskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta [Bulletin of Kostroma State University], 22(3), 152-154.
Evans, V., & Green, M. (2006). Cognitive Linguistics: An Introduction. Edinburgh University Press.
Fauconnier, G. (1994). Mental spaces: Aspects of meaning construction in natural language. Cambridge University Press.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (1998). Conceptual integration networks. Cognitive Science, 22(2), 133-187.
Feldman, D. H., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Gardner, H. (1995). Changing the World: A framework for the study of Creativity. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 22(3), 267. 
Feldman, N. I. (1957). Okkazional'nye slova i leksikografiya [Occasional words and lexicography]. Voprosy Jazykoznanija [Questions of Linguistics], (4), 64-73.
Feshchenko, V. V. (2021). Lingvokreativnost' v hudozhestvennom i nauchnom diskursah [Linguistic creativity in artistic and scientific discourses].  In I. V. Zykova (Ed.), Lingvokreativnost' v diskursah raznyh tipov: Predely i vozmozhnosti [Linguistic creativity in discourses of different types: Limits and possibilities] (pp. 190-257). R. Valent.
Galkina, A. V. (2011). Ovladenie lingvisticheskoj kreativnost'yu v kontekste ovladeniya inostrannym yazykom [Mastering linguistic creativity in the context of foreign language acquisition]. Vestnik Tambovskogo Universiteta. Seriya: Gumanitarnye Nauki [Tambov University Bulletin. Series: Humanities], 102(10), 158-164.
Gardner, H. (1988). Creative lives and creative works: A synthetic scientific approach. The nature of creativity: Contemporary psychological perspectives, 298.
Geronik, E. O., & Samarina, I. V. (2018). K voprosu ob osobennosti funkcionirovaniya okkazionalizmov v angloyazychnoj i russkoyazychnoj turisticheskoj reklame [On the issue of the peculiarities of the functioning of occasionalisms in English-language and Russian-language tourist advertising]. Vestnik Kurganskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta [Bulletin of Kurgan State University], 1(48), 5-7.
Gracia Arnaiz, M. (2001). Nutritional discourse in food advertising: between persuasion and cacophony. Anthropology of Food, (0). 10.4000/aof.989
Guilford, J. P. (1986). Creative talents: Their nature, uses and development. Bearly Limited.
Holtvian, V., & Severynchuk, I. (2015, April 22-24). Nonce vocabulary items as untranslatables or translatables in Ukrainian – English media communication. Humanity, computers and communication, Lviv, Ukraine.
Hou, H. I. (2012). A corpus approach to discourse analysis of newspaper restaurant reviews: A preliminary analysis. Studies in Literature and Language, 5(3), 95.
Ieșeanu, O. (2017). Structural and semantic features of nonce-words in fiction based on the fantasy trilogy ‘His dark materials’ by Philip Pullman. In Analele Ştiinţifice ale Universităţii de Stat din Moldova (pp. 238-242).
Ilyin, E. P. (2009). Psikhologiya tvorchestva, kreativnosti, odarennosti [Psychology of creativity, creativeness, giftedness]. Izdatel'skiy dom “Piter” [Publishing house “Peter”].
Iriskhanova, O. K. (2004). Lingvokreativnye osnovaniya teorii nominalizatsii [Linguistic creative foundations of the theory of nominalization] [Doctoral dissertation, Moscow State Linguistic University].
Jamieson, B. (2023). Can the line cook speak: A critical discourse analysis of the voice and representation of Canadian restaurant staff. The Motley Undergraduate Journal, 1(1).
Kabanova, N. V., & Korneyeva, E. G. (2021). Klassifikatsiya okkazional'nykh leksicheskikh edinits v angliyskoy poezii dlya detey XXI veka (na materiale stikhotvoreniy sovremennykh angliyskikh avtorov) [Classification of occasional lexical units in 21st-century English poetry for children (based on poems by contemporary English authors)]. In Nauka bez granits: Anglistika v XXI veke [Science without borders: English studies in the 21st century] (pp. 145–148). Moscow State Linguistic University.
Karasik, V. I. (2002). Yazykovoj krug: lichnost', koncepty, diskurs [Language circle: personality, concepts, discourse]. Peremena [Change].
Karasik, V. I. (2015). Diskurs [Discourse]. Discourse-Pi, 12(3-4), 147-148.
Kashkin, V. B. (2004). Diskurs [Discourse]. Federal'noe gosudarstvennoe byudzhetnoe obrazovatel'noe uchrezhdenie vysshego obrazovaniya “Voronezhskij gosudarstvennyj universitet” [Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Higher Education “Voronezh State University”].
Kasper, G. (1990). Linguistic politeness: Current research issues. Journal of Pragmatics, 14(2), 193–218.
Kenesei, I. (2007). Semiwords and affixoids: The territory between word and affix. Acta Linguistica Hungarica, 54(3), 263-293.
Khanpira, E. (1972). Okkazional’nye elementy v sovremennoy rechi. [Occasional elements in contemporary speech]. In Lingvisticheskie issledovaniya (na materiale sovremennogo russkogo yazyka) [Linguistic studies (based on contemporary Russian language)] (pp. 245–317). Moskva: Nauka.
Khromykh, A. A. (2016). Okkazional’nye slova i trudnosti ikh perevoda [Occasional words and difficulties of their translation]. Aktual’nye Voprosy Filologicheskoy Nauki XXI Veka [Topical Issues of Philological Science of the 21st Century], 188–194. 
Khursanov, N. I., & Gulyamova, S. B. (2021). Linguistic classifications related to discourse and its classifications. ISJ Theoretical & Applied Science, 10(102), 825-829.
Kiose, M. I. (2021). Lingvokreativnost' v diskurse detskoj literatury [Linguistic creativity in the discourse of children's literature]. In I. V. Zykova (Ed.), Lingvokreativnost' v diskursah raznyh tipov: Predely i vozmozhnosti [Linguistic creativity in discourses of different types: Limits and possibilities] (pp. 363-451). R. Valent.
Kiparsky, P. (1982). From cyclic phonology to lexical phonology. The Structure of Phonological Representations, 1, 131-175.
Kolchina, V. V. (2024). Linguistic creativity in E. S. Aubyn’s prose: Strategies and tactics [Unpublished Master’s dissertation]. Higher School of Economics.
Konieczna, E. (2012). Morphological productivity and creativity in a politically correct language: A case study of lexical innovation. Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov, Series IV: Philology & Cultural Studies, (2), 9-16.
Konopleva, N. V. (2009). Kontekstual’noe ispol’zovanie frazeologicheskikh edinits, semanticheski orientirovannykh na lits muzhskogo pola, v angliyskom i russkom yazykakh [Contextual use of phraseological units semantically oriented to male persons in English and Russian]. Izvestiya Rossiyskogo Gosudarstvennogo Pedagogicheskogo Universiteta im. A. I. Gertsena [Herzen University Journal], (99), 161–166.
Kositskaya, F. L., & Zaytseva, I. E. (2016). Frantsuzskiy gastronomicheskiy diskurs i ego zhanrovaya palitra [French gastronomic discourse and its genre palette]. Vestnik Tomskogo Gosudarstvennogo Pedagogicheskogo Universiteta [Bulletin of Tomsk State Pedagogical University], 2(167), 25–30.
Kövecses, Z. (2019). Metaphorical creativity. Oxford University Press eBooks.
Kozko, N. A., & Pozhidaeva, E. V. (2012). Sovremennyj britanskij restorannyj diskurs: lingvokul'tura pitaniya i pitiya [Contemporary British restaurant discourse: the linguaculture of food and drinking.]. Vestnik Leningradskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta im. A. S. Pushkina [Bulletin of the Leningrad State University named after A. S. Pushkin], 1(4), 166-175.
Kumagai, G., & Kawahara, S. (2022). How Russian speakers express evolution in Pokémon names: an experimental study with nonce words. Linguistics Vanguard, 8(1), 15-27.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (2008). Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago Press.
Langlotz, A. (2006). Idiomatic Creativity: A Cognitive-Linguistic Model of Idiom-Representation and Idiom-Variation in English. http://ci.nii.ac.jp/ncid/BA76659704 
Lieber, R., Arndt-Lappe, S., Fábregas, A., Gagné, C., & Masini, F. (2021). The Oxford encyclopedia of morphology. Oxford University Press.
Litvishko, O. M., Rudenko, N. S., & Chalaya, Yu. P. (2022). Lingvokreativnost' v diskurse elektronnyh SMI: sredstva i metody [Linguistic creativity in the discourse of electronic media: means and methods]. Aktual'nye Problemy Filologii i Pedagogicheskoj Lingvistiki [Actual Problems of Philology and Pedagogical Linguistics], (1), 117-130.
Lykov, A. G. (1976). Sovremennaya russkaya leksikologiya (russkoe okkazionalnoe slovo) [Modern Russian lexicology (the Russian occasional word)]. Moskva: Vysshaya shkola [Moscow: Higher School].
MacKinnon, D. W. (1970). Creativity: A multi-faceted phenomenon. Creativity, 17-32.
Mamadalieva, G. R. (2024). Okkazional'nye slova s kolorativnoj semantikoj v poezii Igorya Severyanina [Occasional words with colorative semantics in the poetry of Igor Severyanin]. Neofilologiya [Neophilology], 10(1), 48-56.
Mamirbaeva, D., & Janabaeva, J. (2022). Discursive analysis of political discourse. Renaissance in the Paradigm of Innovation in Education and Technology in the 21st Century, (1), 34-36.
Mebarki, A. (2018). Discourse and discourse analysis: key concepts. European Academic Research, 6(1), 334–347.
Melkaeva, R.V. (2022). Okkazionalizmy kak sposob realizacii lingvokreativnosti (na materiale angloyazychnogo hudozhestvennogo diskursa) [Occasional words as a way of realization of linguocreativity (based on the English-literary discourse)]. Voprosy Sovremennoj Lingvistiki [Issues of Modern Linguistics], (5), 59-65.
Mensah, E., & Ndimele, R. (2014). Linguistic creativity in Nigerian Pidgin advertising. Sociolinguistic Studies, 7(3), 321-344.
Moskaleva, M. V. (2008). Neologizmy i problema ikh izucheniya v sovremennom russkom yazyke [Neologisms and the problem of their study in contemporary Russian language]. Izvestiya Rossiyskogo Gosudarstvennogo Pedagogicheskogo Universiteta im. A. I. Gertsena [Herzen University Journal], (80), 246–250.
Mymrina, D. F., & Vaseeva, A. S. (2014). Okkazionalizmy v hudozhestvennom tekste: sposoby obrazovaniya i osobennosti perevoda (na materiale proizvedenij Stivena Kinga) [Nonce words in fiction: methods of formation and features of translation (based on the works of Stephen King)]. Filologicheskie Nauki. Voprosy Teorii i Praktiki [Philological Sciences. Theoretical and Practical Issues], (1-1), 114-117.
Nagornaya, A. V. (2019). Grani i granicy lingvokreativnosti: Yazykovye eksperimenty Stivena Kinga [The facets and limits of linguistic creativity: Stephen King's language experiments]. Lenand.
Napolitano, A. (2018). Image repair or self-destruction? A genre and corpus-assisted discourse analysis of restaurants' responses to online complaints. Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis across Disciplines, 10(1), 135–153.
Nedelcheva, S. (2021). Coining nonce words: contrastive research based on a novel. Studies in Linguistics, Culture, and FLT, 9(2), 7-29.
Nesvetailo, Y. N. (2010). Neologizmy i okkazionalizmy kak konstituenty leksicheskogo makropolya sovremennogo angliyskogo yazyka: sistemnyy i slovoobrazovatel'nyy aspekty [Neologisms and occasionalisms as constituents of the lexical macropoly of modern English: systemic and word-formation aspects] [Doctoral dissertation]. Yuzhnyy federal'nyy universitet [Southern Federal University].
Odena, O., & Welch, G. (2009). A generative model of teachers’ thinking on musical creativity. Psychology of Music, 37(4), 416-442.
Olyanich, A. V. (2007). Prezentatsionnaya teoriya diskursa [Presentation theory of discourse]. Gnosis.
Pantelidis, I. S. (2010). Electronic meal experience: A content analysis of online restaurant comments. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 51(4), 483-491. 
Park, C. (1988). A Study on the Rule of Clipping: with Special Reference to the Phonological Structure of English Words. 영학논집 (English Studies), 12, 168-187.
Pavlova, E. B. (2017). Zhanrovo-diskursivnye kharakteristiki britanskogo restorannogo internet-diskursa [Genre-discursive characteristics of British restaurant internet discourse]. Nauchnyj Dialog [Scientific Dialogue], (8), 116–130.
Plag, I. (2018). Word-formation in English (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Radbil, T. B. (2006). Yazykovye anomalie v khudozhestvennom tekste: Andrey Platonov i drugie [Language anomalies in the literary text: Andrey Platonov and others]. Moskovskiy pedagogicheskiy gosudarstvennyy universitet [Moscow State Pedagogical University].
Ratih, E., & Gusdian, R. I. (2018). Word formation processes in English new words of Oxford English dictionary (OED) online. Celtic: A Journal of Culture, English Language Teaching, Literature and Linguistics, 5(2), 24-35.
Rossato, L. (2009). The Discourse of British TV Cookery. Naple: Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II.
Rudinskas, A. G. (2021). Okkazionalizmy i sposoby ikh sozdaniya [Occasionalisms and ways of their creation]. In Idei. Poiski. Resheniya: sbornik statey i tezisov XV Mezhdunarodnoy nauchno-prakticheskoy konferentsii prepodavateley, aspirantov, magistrantov, studentov [Ideas. Searches. Solutions: Collection of articles and abstracts of the XV International Scientific and Practical Conference of Teachers, Postgraduates, Masters, Students] (pp. 116–122). Minsk, BGU.
Sampson, G. (2016). Two ideas of creativity. In Martin Hinton (Ed.). Evidence. Experiment and argument in linguistics and philosophy of language (pp. 15-26). Bern: Peter Lang.
Sannikov, V. (2022). Russkiy yazyk v zerkale yazykovoy igry [Russian language in the mirror of language play]. Litres.
Savelyeva, O. G., & Voloshina, K. S. (2017). Realizatsiya kontsepta «Eda» v leksicheskom tezauruse: antropotsentricheskiy podkhod [Realization of the concept “Food” in the lexical thesaurus: an anthropocentric approach]. Aktual’nye aspekty lingvistiki, lingvodidaktiki i mezhkul’turnoy kommunikatsii [Topical Aspects of Linguistics, Language Didactics, and Intercultural Communication], 160–168.
Schiffrin, D. (1994). Approaches to discourse (Vol. 8). Oxford: Blackwell.
Schneider, K. P., & Barron, A. (Eds.). (2014). Pragmatics of discourse. De Gruyter Mouton.
Shamne, N. L., & Pavlova, E. B. (2019). Linguistic pragmatics of English language restaurant online discourse. Vestnik Volgogradskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta. Seriia 2, Iazykoznanie, 18(3), 182.
Simonton, D. K. (2012). Creative productivity and aging: an age decrement‐or not?. The Wiley‐Blackwell Handbook of Adulthood and Aging, 477-496.
Skovorodnikov, A. P. (2014). Yazykovaya igra [Language game]. In A. P. Skovorodnikov (Ed.), Effektivnoe rechevoe obshchenie (Bazovye kompetentsii) [Effective speech communication (Basic competencies)] (pp. 787-788). Sibirskij federal'nyj universitet [Siberian Federal University].
Sokolova, O. V. (2021). Lingvokreativnost' v reklamnom i poeticheskom diskursah [Linguistic creativity in advertising and poetic discourses]. In I. V. Zykova (Ed.), Lingvokreativnost' v diskursah raznyh tipov: Predely i vozmozhnosti [Linguistic creativity in discourses of different types: Limits and possibilities] (pp. 258-361). R. Valent.
Stein, M. I. (1963). A transactional approach to creativity. Scientific Creativity: Its Recognition And Development, 217-227.
Stepanov, Yu. S. (1995). Alternativnyy mir, diskurs, fakt i printsip prichinnosti [Alternative world, discourse, fact, and the principle of causality]. In Yazyik i nauka kontsa XX veka: sbornik statey [Language and Science at the End of the 20th Century: Collection of Articles] (pp. 35–73). Moscow: Institut yazykoznaniya RAN [Institute of Linguistics, Russian Academy of Sciences].
Stepanova, A. A. (2020). Lingvokreativnost' frazeologicheskih edinic v epistolyarnom diskurse M. I. Cvetaevoj [Linguistic creativity of phraseological units in the epistolary discourse of M. I. Tsvetaeva]. In I. V. Zykova & V. V. Krasnyh (Eds.), Yazyk, kul'tura, tvorchestvo: Mirovye praktiki izucheniya [Language, Culture, Creativity: World Practices of Studying] (pp. 142-151). Gnozis.
Sternberg, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. (1999). The concept of creativity: Prospects and paradigms. Handbook of creativity, 1(3-15).
Stevens, C. (2005). Revisiting the afﬁxoid debate: on the grammaticalization of the word. In T. Leuschner, T. Mortelmans & S. De Groodt (Eds.), Grammatikalisierung im Deutschen (pp. 71-83). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Strauss, S. L. (1982). On “relatedness paradoxes” and related paradoxes. Linguistic Inquiry, 13(4), 694-700.
Stroinea, C. (2021). Linguistic creativity and genre characteristics in the media discourse. Dialogos, 22(38), 107-130.
Sun, K., & Baayen, R. H. (2021). Hyphenation as a compounding technique in English. Language Sciences, 83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langsci.2020.101326 
Szczygłowska, T. (2021). Recurrent lexis and phraseology in English restaurant reviews: A data-driven analysis. Discourse and Interaction, 14(2), 105-125.
Taimur, M. P. (2022). Lingvokreativnost' v mul'timodal'nom diskurse (na materiale anglijskogo yazyka) [Linguistic creativity in multimodal discourse (based on the English language)]. KnoRus.
Tărîţă, S. (2019). Conversion as one of the principle ways of word formation in the English language. Journal of Social Sciences, (2), 52-54.
Terentyeva, E. B. (2015). Spetsifika realizatsii strategiy i taktiks v restorannom internet-diskurse (na materiale angloyazychnykh i russkoyazychnykh restoranov) [Specifics of realization of strategies and tactics in restaurant internet discourse (based on English- and Russian-speaking restaurants)]. V Mire Nauchnykh Otkrytiy [In the World of Scientific Discoveries], (67), 3081–3088.
Terentyeva, E., Milovanova, M., & Pavlova, E. (2018). Genre system of English language restaurant online discourse. In SHS Web of Conferences. EDP Sciences.
Thurlow, C. (2014). Determined creativity: Language play in new media discourse. In Discourse and Creativity (pp. 169-190). Routledge.
Tsakona, V. (2012). Linguistic creativity and institutional design: The case of Greek parliamentary discourse. Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies, 36(1), 91-109.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1985). Discourse and communication. Berlin: W. de Gruter.
Vinogradov, V. S. (2006). Perevod: Obshchie i leksicheskie voprosy [Translation: General and lexical issues] (3rd ed.). Moscow: KDU Publishing House.
Vinokur, T. G. (2016). Zakonomernosti stilisticheskogo ispol'zovaniya yazykovykh edinits [Regularities of stylistic use of language units]. Flinta.
Williams, E. (1981). Argument structure and morphology. Linguistic Review, 1, 81-114.
Williamson, D., Tregidga, H., Harris, C., & Keen, C. (2009). The working engines of distinction: Discourse for main course in restaurant reviews. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 16(1), 55-61.
Wood, R. C. (1996). Talking to themselves: food commentators, food snobbery and market reality. British Food Journal, 98(10), 5-11.
Yazykovaya norma [Linguistic norm]. (n.d.). In Lingvisticheskij enciklopedicheskij slovar' [Linguistic Encyclopedic Dictionary]. https://rus-modern-education-process-dict.slovaronline.com/1101-%D1%8F%D0%B7%D1%8B%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D1%8F_%D0%BD%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%BC%D0%B0 
Yu, A. (2007). A natural history of infixation. Oxford University Press.
Zykova, I. V. (2017). Metayazyk lingvokul'turologii: konstanty i varianty [Metalanguage of linguacultural studies: constants and variants]. Gnosis.
Zykova, I. V. (2021). Lingvokreativnost' v kinodiskurse [Linguistic creativity in film discourse]. In I. V. Zykova (Ed.), Lingvokreativnost' v diskursah raznyh tipov: Predely i vozmozhnosti [Linguistic creativity in discourses of different types: Limits and possibilities] (pp. 100-189). R. Valent.
Zykova, I. V., & Kiose, M. I. (2020). Parametrizatsiya lingvisticheskoy kreativnosti v mezhdiskursivnom aspekte: kinodiskurs vs. diskurs detskoy literatury [Parameterization of linguistic creativity in the interdiscursive aspect: film discourse vs. children’s literature discourse]. Voprosy Kognitivnoy Lingvistiki [Issues of Cognitive Linguistics], 2, 26-40.

Digital References
An inspector’s report on best new restaurant Skof. (2025, February 21). The Good Food Guide. https://www.thegoodfoodguide.co.uk/editorial/features/an-inspectors-report-on-best-new-restaurant-skof# 
Bagnold, R. (2024, September 17). Pavyllon at the four seasons (Park Lane). Major Foodie. https://major-foodie.com/pavyllon-at-the-four-seasons-park-lane/ 
Bagnold, R. (2024, September 21). The Cocochine (Mayfair). Major Foodie. https://major-foodie.com/the-cocochine-mayfair/ 
Clark, M. (2024, December 31). Can an all-day cafe actually be exciting? This one is. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/12/31/dining/cafe-mado-nyc-restaurant-review.html 
Cooper, L. (2025, April 8). Mauby Restaurant Brockley, London Review: A fabulously welcoming and affordable seasonal plates spot. Time Out London. https://www.timeout.com/london/restaurants/mauby
Dent, G. (2024, November 1). Wildflowers, London SW1: ‘Food so refined and beautiful, I felt unkempt’ – restaurant review. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/food/2024/nov/01/wildflowers-london-sw1-grace-dent-restaurant-review 
Galeano-DeMott, C. (2024, September 18). Restaurant review: Pink Steak. Boca Magazine. https://bocamag.com/restaurant-review-pink-steak/ 
Galeano-DeMott, C. (2025, January 23). Restaurant review: Rose’s Daughter. Boca Magazine. https://bocamag.com/restaurant-review-roses-daughter/ 
Gunz, A. (2024, September 16). Panda’s Kitchen: Jay Rayner was right. GourmandGunno. https://www.gourmandgunno.com/blog/2024/9/16/pandas-kitchen-jay-rayner-was-right 
Gunz, A. (2024, November 1). The Baring: Solid ground. GourmandGunno. https://www.gourmandgunno.com/blog/2024/11/1/the-baring-solid-ground 
Hart, B. (2024, September 29). East meets West at the Chimney House in seven dials. Brighton Restaurants Guide and Directory. https://restaurantsbrighton.co.uk/east-meets-west-at-the-chimney-house-in-seven-dials/ 
Hart, B. (2025, February 5). Experiencing Brighton’s first kosher roast. Brighton Restaurants Guide and Directory. https://restaurantsbrighton.co.uk/experiencing-brightons-first-kosher-roast-at-novellino/ 
 Junior’s in Times Square. (2025, January 23). I Just Want To Eat! https://www.ijustwanttoeat.com/post/restaurant-review/juniors-delicatessen-cheesecake-times-square 
Krishna, P. (2025, January 14). A cure for winter blues? Try these cozy new york restaurants. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/01/14/dining/restaurant-review-cafe-kestrel-cocina-consuelo-nyc.html  
Krishna, P. (2025, February 11). My obsessive quest for a thrilling beef noodle soup. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/02/11/dining/lanzhou-beef-noodle-soup.html 
Le Rivage, French restaurant in NYC, NY. (2025, February 24). I Just Want To Eat! https://www.ijustwanttoeat.com/post/restaurant-review/le-rivage-french-restaurant-nyc-ny 
Mackertich, J. (2025, March 25). The Brave Restaurant Islington, London Review: A gastropub from culinary kingpin James Cochran. Time Out London. https://www.timeout.com/london/restaurants/the-brave 
Nouvel, H. (2024, August 15). Afternoon tea by the sea at the Grand. Brighton Restaurants Guide and Directory. https://restaurantsbrighton.co.uk/afternoon-tea-bythe-sea-at-the-grand/ 
Rayner, J. (2025, January 12). Fonda, London: ‘An exuberantly good meal’: restaurant review. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/food/2025/jan/12/fonda-london-an-exuberantly-good-meal-restaurant-review 
Schneier, M. (2024, November 21). Showing Its Age. Borgo displays a confidence that can come only from experience. Grub Street. https://www.grubstreet.com/article/borgo-andrew-tarlow-review.html 
Schneier, M. (2025, January 9). The Tao of Steak. Crane Club has a talented chef, big-money backing, and a whiff of members-only exclusivity. Is that enough? Grub Street. https://www.grubstreet.com/article/restaurant-review-crane-club-nyc.ht
The best Italian restaurants for pasta lovers in Miami. (2024, November 15). Dish Miami. https://www.dishmiami.com/food-drink/best-italian-restaurants-for-pasta-in-miami/ 
The 8 best Asian restaurants in Miami. (2024, December 23). Dish Miami. https://www.dishmiami.com/food-drink/best-asian-restaurants-in-miami/ 
 Top 11 best breakfast and brunch spots in Charleston. (2024, September 22). Travel Munchers. https://travelmunchers.com/best-breakfast-and-brunch-spots-in-charleston/ 
