
                  
The Government of Russian Federation
State Budgetary Higher Education Unit
National Research University
«Higher School of Economics»

Faculty of World Economy and World Politics
«International Program «International Relations and Global Studies»

Thesis Paper
On the topic:

«Influence of terrorism on the evolution of international organisations in the Sahel region (2000 - 2024) »

By the student
of the fourth year,
group 211
Vorobey Alexey Evgenievich

Academic supervisor:
Skriba Andrei Sergeevich




Moscow 2025
Table of Contents
Introduction
The Sahel region encompasses a wide range of countries that face a number of security issues. The most prominent security threat is the spread of terrorism and the actions of the terrorist groups that reduce stability of the states in Sahel. The security situation attracts regional and international actors to the region. Under the threat of terrorism actors are encouraged to establish security and economic international organisations (IOs). Therefore, both security and economic IOs are widely spread in Sahel. Regardless of the institutional differences among the arrangements and their members (be that regional or international actors), the majority of them are influenced by activities of the terrorist groups in the region, thus being forced to change. The dissemination of terrorism incentivises international organisations to increase cooperation not only among member states, but also among the organisations themselves, establishing various partnerships and accelerating the integration process. Hence, the integration arrangements create a structure for further cooperation in order to tackle terrorism and extremism. 
The research considers an equal number of economic and security organisations based in the Sahel region. Thus, providing the opportunity not only to reveal the influence of terrorism on each of the integration arrangements, but also to disclose whether the influence may vary depending on the type of the international organisation. Therefore, the paper examines the following organisations: G5 Sahel (security), ECOWAS (security), Liptako-Gourma (economic), Lake Chad Basin Commission (economic). Albeit, the organisations have more domains than the ones they are studied for, only the policies of the interest for the research are considered. Thus, the influence of terrorism on Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Liptako-Gourma will be analysed through economic institutions and policies of the organisation. In their turn, G5 Sahel and ECOWAS will be considered through security institutions, economic and development policies, and actions undertaken to tackle issues.
Literature Review
A number of academic articles were dedicated to the understanding of terrorist activities in Sahel and their influence on international organisations in the region. The literature can be divided by topics into three parts: factors fostering spread of terrorism; perception of terrorism by the actors (state and international organisations); actual response of actors to terrorist activities. 
Starting with the first part – factors fostering dissemination of terrorism in Sahel, Abubakar (2023) in the research draws two major factors that currently assist empowerment of terrorist groups. On the one hand, high engagement of foreign actors in the security architecture of the Sahel region and consequent interventions based on the «War on Terror» paradigm has caused instability within several North African states. Such actions encouraged local militias and youth groups to struggle against the actions of foreign countries, thus undermining stability of the states and increasing local support for the military groups operating in Sahel. On the other hand, research pays attention to the colonial legacies, implying both presence of extractive institutions in most of the African countries and low economic growth. For instance, Mali, Chad, Niger face more military overthrows than the countries with stable institutions, like Togo or Nigeria. Whereas insufficient economic performance leads to loss of popularity by the government and increasing appeal to the changes brought by terrorist groups, which could be seen in the 2023 Nigerian military coup. Hence, Abubakar argues that low economic growth and high involvement of foreign actors in the security sphere in regional affairs act as the contributors to the empowerment of the terrorist groups in Sahel. Galeazzi et. al. (2017) studies the spread of terrorism in the Lake Chad Basin Region and the responses provided by the regional organisations, especially the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC). The author argues that the development of terrorist activities in the Lake Chad region is increasing due to ineffective targeting of the terrorist groups. The LCBC member states increased their security means yet did it in a long period of time. Therefore, the author argues that the resurgence of Boko Haram in Northern Nigeria, which threatened all of the member states, was addressed only after 2 years of the initial attack of the armed groups. Thus, arguing that the ineffective management and lack of coordination resulted in the enhancement of terrorist groups.  
The second part considers the perception of terrorist activities by the actors in order to distinguish what are the exact goals of the policies. Lopez-Lucia (2020) considers understandings of both local and international actors participating in the security architecture in Sahel. The author argues that non-African states approach the terrorism as a regional phenomenon neglecting the focus on specific groups, whereas the African states understand the concept through direct focus on the groups operating within their boundaries. International actors «deconstruct» the African continent in several regions and address specific issues within each of them without consideration of the states or organisation, thus prioritising establishment of a secure environment, rather than promotion of stable institutions or development. In contrast, African countries perceive terrorism through direct involvement of military groups in destabilization of states, thereby, focusing the approach on the local level, rather than regional one. Sandor (2016) assesses how the international organisations understand terrorism, which determines their behaviour. The author asserts that Sahel as the region is perceived to be a centre of terrorist activities and insecurity because of transnational crimes. Sandor claims that the drug trafficking, large scale migration and ungoverned spaces define how IOs perceive terrorist activities. Sandor concludes that the international organisations and other actors aim at increasing engagement in Sahel because the region by itself is perceived to be the centre of insecurity. Thus, emphasising the similar approach of international actors with the goal of establishing order in the security sphere. 
The third part is dedicated to the response by local and global actors toward dissemination of terrorism, which is inspected in order to track the changes in methods to establish a secure situation. Aniekwe & Brooks (2023) take into consideration the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) – the military institution that was initially created as an ad hoc group among the LCBC member states, but later became the full-fledged institution ruled by the organisation. The authors claim that the MNJTF evolved from a security policy of short-term cooperation to the institution, which currently has a number of functions. The authors conclude that the MNJTF is the example of successful integration, which simultaneously addresses security issues in the region and does not force member states to increase expenses on direct military confrontations. Baldaro & D’Amato (2023) (in their research) focus on the «preventing and countering violent extremism» (PCVE) projects utilized by West African states. The authors claim that the governments commonly use policies (1) to tackle migration issues through increased border control; (2) ensure provision of basic human rights and education; (3) and foster economic development. Through tackling issues in these spheres, the governments intend to counter disseminating terrorism in the region and increase resilience of the vulnerable groups in order to prevent further recruitment into terrorist organisations. The author concludes that as the governments of the African states approach the problem through different directions (not only military), but the terrorist activities would also be easier to address. The projects and consequent policies mentioned by Baldaro & D’Amato are usually adopted by the international organisations as the means to battle terrorist threats, while avoiding creation of new institutions or increase in the financial requirements to tackle the issue. 
With the wide spectrum of covered topics in the academic literature, still there is insufficient consideration of (1) the influence terrorism has on international organisations; and (2) institutional changes of the integration projects as reaction to security issues, which designates a research gap. The majority of academic literature focuses on the influence of international actors, such as the US, EU or France in the security architecture of the Sahel region. A number of articles are also dedicated to the evaluation of French participation in security affairs in Sahel not only as independent actors, but also as a donor of G5 Sahel – a security organisation established to battle terrorism. Yet, the consequences and further influence that terrorist activities have on the institutional structure of the international organisations have little coverage in the literature. Thus, the relevance of the research lies within the significance of understanding the policies and actions undertaken to jointly tackle the common threat. The analysis of the aforementioned problem would not only permit us to adjust the current policies to be more efficient and avoid increasing expenses, but also to develop an effective approach to address the regional terrorist issues and establish a secure environment.
Hence, the research question is: How terrorist activities influenced the institutional evolution of international organisations based in the Sahel region?
The hypothesis is: Spread of terrorism forced member states to cooperate on the common security issue, which in turn was applied to international organisations. Dissemination of terrorism in the Sahel region threatens the internal stability of countries that participate in regional integration projects regardless of the organisation focusing on economic, environmental or security cooperation. Thereby, terrorism becomes a trigger for governments to enhance the integration in the security sphere to tackle the common problem. The countries promote a terrorism fighting agenda within the organisations, leading to the further changes of integration attempts. In turn the organisations not only initiate adjustment of policies to meet the needs of member states but create new institutions that would address the posed problem. As the cooperation enhances within the organisation, the policies and institutions start to alter and become increasingly engaged in the security affairs. Hence, changing the goals, approaches and structure of the regional international organisations. 
The goal of the research is to disclose the influence of terrorist activities on the major international organisations functioning in the Sahel region. The research considers four organisations, two of which act upon security matters – G5 Sahel, ECOWAS, whereas the other two are focused on economic development – Liptako-Gourma Authority and Lake Chad Basin Commission. The different types of integration projects are examined not only to study the influence of terrorism on organisations, but also to trace the differences in changes between economic and security organisations, thus providing the comprehensive analysis. In addition, the features of the responses and further development of each type of organisation is to be considered. The timeframe of the research study considers the changes within the organisations from 2000 to 2024 due to increase in dissemination of terrorist activities in the region and increasing number of institutional changes within the organisations.
Methodology
The study applies the liberal intergovernmentalism theoretical framework, the theory introduced by Andrew Moravcsik in 1998. The theory initially explains the causes and factors that endorsed European Integration; however, the logic can be utilised to explain behaviour of other integration projects in the rational choice paradigm. The theory assumes that the member states within the international organisations are rational actors that make (rational) choices based on domestic agenda and national interests. Thus, Moravcsik argues that the changes within the international organisations are the outcomes of the «series of rational choices made by national leaders», in other words – national interests of member states of international organisations define the results of the latter. Intergovernmentalism considers both political and economic interests, both of them act as the driving forces in changes of IOs if interests coincide among the member states. Thus, since the theory takes into consideration the states and their domestic affairs as made by rational actors, the theory can be applied to the integration projects in the Sahel region. Hence, the research will focus on the influence of member states and their decisions on the changes in international organisations. 
The research applies qualitative methods of analysis to simultaneously compare and track the exact influences for institutional changes caused by the terrorist activities. Qualitative analysis is used to study the causes and further consequences of adopted policies and developed approaches by the actors in the Sahel region. Qualitative analysis allows for deep research into the causes of institutional changes and cooperation/partnership agreements. The analysis also helps to derive the definition of terrorist activities specific for the Sahel region. Comparative and descriptive discourse analyses are utilised to examine the countries’ perception of terrorism and their different approaches towards the solution or positioning of the terrorist threats. Thus, disclosing the changes within the selected organisations on institutional level as the reactions towards spreading terrorism by simultaneously considering the official and unofficial discourse following the changes. Finally, the process tracing method is applied to gather and analyse the data on the causes and consequences of the implemented policies. Thus, the method allows to reveal the rationale behind the institutional changes of the organisations and how it was positioned to be necessary for adoption. In addition, process tracing provides higher understanding of the environment and context, in which the organisations were initiating institutional changes. 
gather primary data from the official websites of the IOs using the python programming tools to analyse data in Excel software. Specifically, to count mentions of selected words related to terrorism in official sources. The tools allow for visualisation in the form of tables and graphs based on information from official speeches and documents. 
There are limitations to the research. The study focuses on terrorist activities and consequent response of participants of regional integration projects. However, the research does not focus on the international actors, which are not member states of any international organisation in the region. The international actors will be considered if they act as the main donors to the organisation, partners or unofficial leader. The research does not cover the development of the newly established security organisation – Alliance of Sahel region (2023) due to ongoing state of affairs and therefore lack of academic literature, although the organisation does have influence on the changes of some organisations in the 2020s. Finally, the data gaps on the official websites of international organisations can be located, thus hindering the possibility to gather information and conduct further analysis.
Among the primary sources the paper recognises speeches of official representatives of international organisations’ member states on official websites of international organisations. Documents on institutional changes, communique, and published policies on official websites are evaluated by the process tracking method, allowing to disclose the reasons for changes. Meanwhile, the secondary sources include analysed information on the institutional changes in the organisations presented by media or research papers. Academic literature provides the definitions of terrorism in the region, and the evaluation of success of the organisations’ institutional changes. In addition, research papers allow for distinction between the security and economic policies due to their increased convergence during the response to the terrorist threats. The media sources are used to present an unofficial point of view, which was broadcasted and therefore influenced public opinion. The media is considered in order to find out reasons for institutional changes that are either not presented or mentioned by the official statement of the organisations. Thus, deepening the level of analysis and allowing for inclusion of more factors during the comparison.
Research Structure
The main body is divided into three parts: historical overview, historical and comparative analysis of institutions. changes and interpretation of results. The first chapter starts with the definition of terrorism based on the existing literature and approaches. Then it discusses the theoretical framework of liberal intergovernmentalism for the future analysis of terrorism’s institutional effects. Finally, it presents the historical background of four organisations (G5 Sahel, Lake Chad Basin Commission, Liptako-Gourma Authority, ECOWAS): their formation, institutional changes and interaction with terrorist organisations before 2000. The organisations that were established in the 2010s would be considered in the forms of initiatives or documents (if present) that led to their creation. 
The second chapter initially gathers the information on how the organisations were institutionally changing from 2000 to 2024. Later, the research draws on conclusions from the historical analysis. Then, the chapter presents synthesised information on the institutional evolution of the organisations and creates tables for comparative analysis. The comparative tables consist of the official and unofficial (presented by media) reasons for institutional changes, therefore demonstrating possible differentiations in reasoning for implementation of security policies. Finally, the chapter draws on the conclusions on the differences in response to the regional terrorist threats between the economic and security organisations.
The third chapter focuses on interpretation of the research results through liberal intergovernmentalism framework to answer the research question. The chapter starts with the analysis of differences between economic and security organisations, their rationale, benefits and imperfections in decisions. The chapter presents the preliminary inferences based on the results of previous chapters. Finally, chapter contains the discussion section, where current development of organisations, limitations and future implications are presented. The future trends of application of the research outcomes are considered in both scientific and policymaking fields. 
Expected results
The evolution of international organisations will be disclosed through liberal intergovernmentalism framework. The research will test the following hypothesis: Dissemination of terrorism encourages member states to cooperate on the problem of terrorism and therefore enhance security issues. Increasing insecurity in the region, fosters the regional organisations to increase the levels of cooperation in the security sphere, regardless of the initial goals in order to overcome common problems. Finally, the dissemination of terrorism had an equal institutional impact on both economic and security organisations in the Sahel region, regardless of their initial goals or policies. 

Chapter 1. Theoretical basis and history of international organisations
1.1 Definition of terrorism
Terrorism is a phenomenon widely used to describe violence by non-state actors with the aim to undermine the stability of a state. Nevertheless, the concept of terrorism may vary due to regional specifics, especially for the region that is full of insecurity. Therefore, there is a need to draw a line between what is considered as a terrorism and what is not. There are several basic approaches towards understanding terrorism: as a violence against people, as an attempt to change the political order of a country, and as a tool to challenge the global system.
Terrorism as a violence implies that terrorist groups use violent actions against people. The goal of such type of terrorism is usually presumed to be coercion of people to do what the terrorist group is willing. Primoratz (1990) in his analysis of terrorism as a concept distinguishes whether terrorism is defined by a political action or it rather ties to the idea of threatening civilians. The author comes with the definition of terrorism as a violence «with the aim of intimidating them into a course of action they otherwise would not take». Forest and Giroux (2011), on the other hand, divide terrorist activities into two domains – domestic and transnational. Domestic terrorism refers to the violent activities aimed at threatening the civilian population. By doing so the groups intend to gain power in the frontier regions and increase their own benefit. Terrorist groups usually threaten civilians to increase bargaining power or gain strategic advantage over unprotected regions, usually frontier (Brown, 2018). The control or at least advantage over border regions is also needed to maintain drug and human trafficking in sub-Saharan Africa (Kangaspunta, 2003). Transnational terrorism is basically an external threat to the sovereignty of a state, which will be considered in the respective definition of terrorism. In summary, the approach focuses on the individual level and the ways threat is used at this level, neglecting political or economic reasons. 
Nevertheless, such an approach towards understanding terrorism is highly narrow and may call criminals and lawbreakers – terrorists. Both of the groups (terrorist & criminals) may threaten individuals for their own benefits or even use the same means (Cooper, 2001). In addition, it has a high focus on an individual, which although is applicable in liberal theories, still does not consider states as actors of international organisations. Therefore, it is essential to address other definitions of terrorism to increase the scope of understanding the concept. 
Terrorism as an instrument to change policy and order of a state implies use of force targeting politicians, civilians and weak groups. The instruments (attacking border regions, kidnapping and threatening population) remain the same, however the goals are different – threaten regimes of states. Such type is best defined by the Organisation of African Unity (currently African Union) in 1999 as «act, a violation of the criminal laws of a State which may endanger the life or freedom of any person or cause damage to public or private property». The definition includes human security, however, focuses on the state sovereignty, a threat to which is perceived as a terrorist act. The approach focuses on the influence that terrorist groups have not only on politics of the states, but also its stability, economic prosperity and even environmental security. The similar definition is provided in the 2015 Global Terrorism Index (GTI) report, which is defined as «use of illegal force and violence by non-state actors to attain a political, economic or social goal through fear or intimidation». 
The instrumental approach towards terrorism separates terrorist activities from the criminals that break laws. Here terrorist groups aim at destabilising the current regime or harming people to get their own benefit over the government. The goals already become political, rather than personal. The violence is a tool and policy changes within the domestic political environment is the final goal of the actions (Walther & Retaille, 2011). Thus, instrumental understanding of terrorism already focuses on state dynamics and considers the features that influence internal decision making of a country. This approach is more suitable for the research of the influence of terrorism on international organisations by affecting internal state dynamics. 
Finally, terrorism can be defined as activities aimed at changing the global system. Cilliers (2010) argues that the terrorist groups seek to attack the United States and undermine the current order of the global system. Terrorist groups operate on two levels simultaneously: sub-national and international, therefore focusing both on state and international levels (Cilliers, 2010). Bere (2024) adds to the previous definition that terrorist attacks regardless of the region focus on the representatives of the US, be they citizens or political representatives. Yet, in the case of international terrorism, both authors consider the influence of terrorism in the link with the actions of the United States, which is a limitation to the use of such approach of terrorism. Apau and Banunle (2019), on the other hand, argue that terrorism is a wider concept, including not only regional non-governmental groups, but also trans-national criminal networks, separatist movements and extremist organisations. Abubakar (2023) argues that the dissemination of terrorism enhanced in the Sahel region after the international actors started engaging in the regional security affairs. Thus, leading to the increase in struggle not only against the local governments, but also against the international actors, including international organisations and states from beyond. Terrorism goes beyond state and its borders, therefore fostering the analysis of a wider scope of actors, not only military groups that directly threaten the stability of a country.
The definition of terrorism through a variety of actors would, on the one hand, expand the ability to analyse the influence of terrorism on international organisations in Sahel. On the other hand, it would drastically increase the number of factors to consider, therefore making the analysis more complex and less encompassing to develop a wider answer to the research question. Hence, terrorism in the study will be approached through the instrumental understanding. Terrorism as a concept and terrorist groups as actors use violence, and military means to change the flow of political events within a country, ranging from changing policies to regime change. The definition given also fits in the theoretical framework of liberal intergovernmentalism, allowing to research internal political dynamics of the states and influence of their interactions on the adjustments in and institutional evolution of international organisations the states participate in. Consequently, the study will consider the following terrorist groups operating in the region: Al-Qaeda, Boko Haram, Ansarul Islam, Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims, Islamic State, ISIS (Apau and Banunle, 2019).
1.2 Liberal intergovernmentalism framework and its application
The liberal intergovernmentalism theory was introduced by Andrew Moravcsik in his analysis on the European integration process. Moravcsik focuses on all the states as the main actors in shaping the policies of international institutions (integration projects) as it usually approached through realist theories. In addition, the author considers the influence of internal players of each state. The actors of this model (both states and state groups) follow a rational decision-making model. Rationality is presented in the will of each member state of the integration project to decrease transactional costs and increase efficiency of each implemented policy. States will engage in participation of international organisations only if it will benefit the country itself. The interests presented for negotiations and national goals in the first place, are created through rational decision-making. Therefore, the final decisions of international institutions are also considered as rational (utility maximising outcome). At the level of international organisation, states engage in bargaining and negotiations in promoting their national interests. The final agreement that countries have as a result of negotiations forces each of the members of the international organisation to implement and follow it. The degree of implementation (compulsory or non-compulsory) depends on the organisation and its basic principles. The process of reaching the final decision is similar for the majority of integration projects. However, to ensure commitment of each member state to the integration project, they are obliged to give up part of their sovereignty to the international organisation. By doing so, the actors will be constrained in their choices that may utilise personal profit but impede development of the organisation.
In terms of the behaviour of the states, their rationale of policy choice in integration projects are analysed through internal state dynamics. Moravcsik argues that interest and lobby groups of each state engage in competition with each other in order to change and adjust national interests, which will be represented in international institutions. During these negotiations the state representatives in integration projects create certain interests that a country is aimed to promote and protect. These preferences are formed on the basis of economic, social or cultural preferences of the country and highly depend on the current agenda. What is more, the agenda, needs of a country and its interest groups are formed by external factors – threats, shifts in economic relations, geopolitical tensions, etc. The decision-making at this stage is also based on a rational decision-making model (utility seeking actors). Thus, inferring that the rational decisions made at national level influence the final decision-making process within the whole organisation (Moravcsik, 1999).
The liberal intergovernmentalism framework with its logic will be applied to the case of international organisations in the Sahel region. The logic of the framework can explain the reasons for policy implementation for each member state in the organisation. The Sahel region is believed to be the centre of insecurity (Sandor, 2016), thus forcing states in the region to protect themselves against the activities of regional terrorist groups. Grinin (2020) argues that due to widespread terrorism, the countries in the region face instability and lack further economic development. As economic downturns appear often, a country in Sahel is not able to project full authority over its territories leading to the vicious cycle of inability of states to protect themselves. Several countries, such as Mali and Niger not only could not battle terrorism, but also became centres of spreading terrorism (Grinin, 2020). As a rational actor, a country in such a situation aims to reduce costs for anything, with the main goal of having enough resources to ensure survival. This is best done through integration projects – military and economic, each of which reduces the economic pressure on each of the member states (Eke & Ani, 2017). The international organisations that are created by the African countries are also managed by all of them. 
The changes within the integration projects in the Sahel region are driven by the issue that all of the member states face. The following part analyses the historical development of 4 international organisations. Integration projects in the region tend to focus on two major goals: security and economic development. Both of the issues are covered by any integration project, however to a different scope, be that reaching security through economic development or vice versa. Consequently, the spreading terrorism in the Sahel region encourages member states to promote new and adjust old policies within the international organisations they participate in. 
1.3 History of International Organisations
Before analysis of the changes made within the organisations, it is essential to consider the initial position of each of the integration projects including aims and structure of the organisation. Thus, the dynamics of changes made prior to 2000 in the organisation can be traced. In case the organisation was created after 2000, it will be considered in its main initial goals, institutional structure and how it positioned itself in the region.
G5 Sahel
G5 Sahel is a security international organisation based in the West Africa region. The organisation was created in 2014 based on the «Convention Establishing the G5 Sahel» (French. Convention Portant Creation Du G5 Sahel). The organisation officially is still operating, however de facto already ceased to exist as from 2022 to 2024 its major member states (Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Chad, Mauritania) withdrew from all the institutions of G5 Sahel. 
The organisation’s scope of operations varied from establishment of military security in the region to encouragement of economic development within its member states. Based on the establishing document the organisation was created to «guarantee development and security conditions in the area of the member countries», «improve the living conditions of the populations» and «combine development and security, supported by democracy and good governance». The organisation from the very beginning put itself as the security actor in the region with the consecutive aim of achieving economic development and improvement of living conditions in its member states. The presence of «Defence and Security Committee» as the separate organ and decision making based on the concept of consensus already indicates that the aim of the organisation is security cooperation.  
The reasons for creation of G5 Sahel point to the fact that it initially was thought of as a military organisation. The issue of terrorism was existing before 2014, therefore there must have been the impulse to create an organisation that would address common security issues. Camara (2020) argues that the Malian crisis of 2012 had a significant impact on deterioration of the security affairs in the region. Prior to 2014 the region faced a cascade of terrorist events, starting with the Malian crisis and empowerment of terrorist groups within its borders. Later the activities of terrorist groups spill over to the neighbouring states of Niger and Burkina Faso, leading to the region-wide spread of instability. The countries by themselves were not able to address the issues effectively due to weak armed forces and institutional capacities. Therefore, they demand an institution that would assist in resolving security problems states face. Welz (2022) looks for structural, rather than institutional explanations and concludes that there were no organisations that could deal with security problems. Thus, the author considers it as the reason for why G5 Sahel was created – neither Africa Union, nor ECOWAS was capable of addressing the security problems. For these reasons Sandor (2016) calls the Sahel region «the centre of insecurity» due to lack of governance, uncontrolled arms and drug trafficking and large-scale human migration. 
The French participation in regional peacebuilding prior to establishment of the G5 Sahel also played a significant role in the promotion and funding of the integration project. El Khou (2019) argues that apart from terrorist attacks on the future member states, omnipresent drug smuggling, human trafficking, and frequent rebellions in the region acted as the obstacle for any peacekeeping force. France, as the former coloniser, was present in the region for the reasons of peacekeeping and conducting anti-terrorist activities. However, the country was unable to deal with the problems even with the support of the United Nations, United States and African Union. Consequently, after the failed number of operations in the region and creation of alliances among terrorist groups, France was required to establish a security organisation to deal with its major problem (El Khou, 2019). Hence, all of the above-mentioned factors facilitate the spread of terrorist groups within the region, thus threatening the stability of the nation-states. Therefore, the creation of any international organisation is tied to the idea of cooperation against common problems and sharing costs (Sandors, 2016). Thus, the G5 Sahel was intended to be a security organisation not only due to the reduction of transitional costs for underdeveloped countries of the region, but also because of the absence of viable alternatives that would solve the problem.
Initially there were 5 institutions as the organisation was created: Conference of Heads of State, Council of Ministers, Permanent Secretariat, Committee of Defence and Security, National Committees (Convention Portant Creation Du G5 Sahel, 2014). The Conference is the highest body of the organisation, consisting of the heads of the member states that meet at least one time a year. It is a decision-making organ that makes final decisions for execution on the basis of consensus among member states including their presence during the vote.  The Council of Ministers is the assisting body to the conference, it implements all the policies agreed on by the heads of the states. In addition, the Council ensures implementation of the policies on the national level, provides recommendations to the conference and allocates budget for the organisation functions. The Secretariat is the executive body that is supervised by the Council of Ministers. The Committee of Defence and Security is the advisory body consisting of ministers of defence with the main goal of providing recommendations of the policies that heads of the states should implement. Other representatives from each of the member states participate in the National Committees that can comment and discuss the policies under consideration. The initial structure of the organisation
Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC)
Lake Chad Basin Commission is the international organisation located in the centre of the Sahel region. It was created in 1964 based on the Fort Lamy agreement with Cameroon, Chad, Niger, Nigeria being the founding members and extending further to CAR and Libya making a total of 6 states by 2024. The initial goal of the integration project was and remained the «development of Chad Basin» area. Therefore, to achieve this the organisation in the founding treaty prohibited states to damage in any way the water resources of Lake Chad. In addition, LCBC set the need to increase security over the area through cooperation to ensure control over the area (Convention and statutes relating to the development of the Chad basin, 1964). Consequently, by establishing a need to create a safe environment in the region, the LCBC set its scope to be limited not by development affairs, but rather security in its military sense. 
The initial institutional structure of the established organisation consisted of 3 bodies: Commission, Heads of State and Government, Secretariat. Heads of State and Government is the decision-making institution that adopts the final resolutions or policies for further implementation made based on the consensus principle. The Commission is the major body in the organisation that operates in such fields as: dispute resolution between member states, approval of the member states’ policies regarding Lake Chad Basin, holding consultations with states on the topic of water resources and ensuring implementation of policies. Still, despite its wide scope of functions, it only provides propositions to the heads of the states that already adopt the final version of resolutions. The Secretariat is a bureaucratic institution assigned with the creation of draft policies and working with official documentation. Despite the diversity of the goals set by the establishing treaty of the organisation ranging from promotion of development to maintenance of a secure environment in the region, no more institutions were created or assigned within the organisation. What is more, the LCBC did not initiate major policies of action or changes in the structure until the end of the 20th century due to coups and political instability within the member state (Njeuma & Malaquais, 2004). Thus, hindering possible agreements within the integration project. Hence, although the LCBC was created in the middle of the 20th century, in reality it only started operating and implementing policies only at the end of the century. 
In the 1980s member states of the organisation faced a number of crises, which not only hindered development of the organisation, but also encouraged state to cooperate on resolving them. During the 1970s and early 1980s states faced massive droughts with Niger and Chad being affected the most (Impact Assessment, 2014). Inability of governments to address the drought issue worsened the civil war in Chad and weakened its borders with Niger (ibid.). In 1965 the civil war in Chad erupted with two major reasons: inadequate taxation of population and constant insecurity on the country’s borders caused by terrorist groups (Fuchs, 1996). Except for flawed government policies, the states in the Sahel region that are often affected by droughts suffer most from terrorist attacks (Maconga, 2023). Unbeneficial weather conditions weaken borders making them more vulnerable to the terrorist movement and consequent attacks. The civil war in Chad also led to political instability within Niger, in turn resulting in closure of borders between Nier and Nigeria, and mass population displacement (Impact Assessment, 2014). In 1985 the civil war ended, which was a pushing force that encouraged member states of the organisation to increase interstate partnership. Thus since 1985 the Lake Chad Basin Commission started undergoing institutional restructuring, which was pushed by the unstable situation in the region. In addition, in 1988 the LCBC not only started considering entrance of the Central African Republic (CAR) to the organisation but also commenced cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme to improve management of the resources in the region (Njeuma & Malaquais, 2004). 
In the 1990s the restructuralisation of the integration project continued. Firstly, the Commission expanded its functions by setting clear objectives that the organisation intends to achieve. Thus, the project management, supervision and implementation of each policy was distributed among respective representatives of the sphere (Galeazzi et. al., 2017). Secondly, the reform implied reduction of budgeting required from each of the member states. The policy was adopted in order to attract more states to participate in the integration project (Abu & Ahmed, 2021). Consequently, simultaneously decreasing costs for all member states and increasing functions of the organisation by expanding its membership. The changes in budgeting approach allowed for accession of CAR in 1994 and Sudan in 2000 to the organisation expanding the LCBC area of coverage and operations (Odada et. al., 2005; Abu & Ahmed, 2021; UNOPS, 2002). Thirdly, the organisation restated its intentions to develop the Lake Chad region, therefore it started to implement coordination programs to increase participation of all states in the objective (Odada et. al., 2005). Despite the stated objectives of environmental development, the organisation also stated the requirement for dispute settlement in the region (UNOPS, 2002). The states must ensure that the water resources are available for multiple actors and are not monopolised by any company. Abu & Ahmed (2021) argue that the reform was successful only in the sphere of budgeting and achieving its goals. In terms of establishing a secure environment for development of the area, the changes within the organisation did not bring any benefit.  
The final institutional change within the organisation prior to the 2000s was in 1994 during the 8th Summit of Heads and Government – the most significant organ of the organisation. The organisation in 1994 started implementing policies to tackle security in the region. The LCBC created a military group that would provide direct response to the security crises in LCBC and neighbouring countries, thus aiming to strengthen transnational borders (Galeazzi et. al., 2017). What is more, the organisation started tackling the root causes of insecurity being migration, poverty, food insecurity (LCBC, 2008).
Most importantly, the organisation laid the foundation for creation of the Multinational Joined Task Force (MNJTF) – military group to battle terrorist groups in the region, consisting majorly of the LCBC member states. The group was initially created by Nigeria, Cameroon and Benin, with Chad and Niger joining it in 1998 (MNJTF, 2020). Thus by 1998 the Lake Chad Basin Commission fully possessed armed forces directly created to battle terrorist groups in the region, majorly against Boko Haram. Consequently, the members of MNJTF gained access to the free and unlimited movement of military arsenal across members of the military group to assist fighting terrorism (Galeazzi et. al., 2017). Nevertheless, dating back to the 1990s the military group was not used by any of the states up until the end of the 2000s (Crisis Group, 2020). There are a number of viable explanations for creation and instant abandonment of the military groups. Lack of coordination between states (increased difficulty of coordination between LCBC and separate member states), low incentives to integrate in the security sphere (participants of the MNJTF are also members of regional organisations with security systems – ECOWAS & LCBC) and absence of crisis to prove the group useful (no pushing force for states to seek integration). Consequently, the MNJTF resumed its functioning in 2009 as the Boko Haram groups were striking Niger and Nigeria (MNJTF, 2020). 
Secondly, to address the poverty and lack of human security in the LCBC member states, the organisation commenced the Inter-Basin Water Transfer Project (IBWT). The project had several goals, with the main one – to prevent water resources from depleting and ensure the survival of the population dependent on them (LCBC, 2008). To accomplish the task, the project started to divert water resources from the lakes to areas with no access to water. Therefore, the low developed areas would get opportunities for improvement of agricultural activities through irrigation and even increase energy production (Shumilova et al., 2018; Hanasaki et al., 2018). By doing so the organisation intended to alleviate negative impacts of terrorist attacks on poor regions, thus not only preventing possible rebellions, but also recruitment of low strata of society to the terrorist groups. 
As a result, the Lake Chad Basin Commission by the end of the 20th century, although remained mainly focused on environmental development due to the number of policies implemented by the time, still was taking obligations of a security organisation to protect borders between member states. Lake Chad Basin Commission, as in the case of ECOWAS (discussed later) was obliged to incorporate security functions due to widespread insecurity caused by actions of terrorist groups. The civil wars and military coups within Chad and Niger led to institutional restructuralisation of the LCBC in security and developmental spheres simultaneously. The creation of the Multinational Joint Task Force as well as other policies dedicated to increasing security in the region are explained by the needs of governments. The MNJTF was not operating until the 2010s, yet it was created between members of LCBC and unofficial leaders of ECOWAS, Nigeria, to ensure secure borders between the states. Therefore, by creation of the MNJTF the governments show their will and dedication to the resolution of the security issues. On top of that, the creation of a military group with the participation of Nigeria, which is already a member of ECOWAS with its own military force (ECOMOG) does show the desire of Nigeria to secure borders with its neighbours, which are participants of LCBC. The domestic security issues that appear on the borders and decimate across and beyond the country, thus harming neighbours pushed major actors of the regional organisations to cooperate and widen the scope of operation to cover military security issues. 
Liptako-Gourma Authority
Liptako-Gourma Authority is an economic international organisation that aims to promote economic development across its member states: Burkina Faso, Niger, Mali. The organisation as it exists now only appeared in 2011, before that it was a mission set in 1970 by two United Nations organs – United Nations Program for Development (UNDP) and United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) (Liptako-Gourma, 2024). Beyi (2023) argues that the countries-participants of the organisation initially faced a number of the same political, social and economic problems, majority of which were legacies of colonialism. Politically, neither of the countries had a clear division of political borders, nor did they have control over them. Thus, creating an area for high migration flows and empowerment of terrorist groups that can move and operate among the countries without constraints. Additionally, geographical location creates more problems for administrative division, making it harder to distinguish between counties at any level. The social sphere enhances the issues of political discontents. High rate of human displacement and artificial division of ethnic am social groups led to the conflicts between them, spurring violence and even conflicts between them. Therefore, making it a thriving ground for terrorist activities. Economically, since the countries suffered from political instability and lack of control over vast resources within their borders, the economic development is highly limited (Beyi, 2023). Accordingly, with the assistance provided by and under the supervision of the United Nations bodies the mission for economic and human development was launched. The initial operation of the mission was centred around the share use of natural resources on the borders of three countries, including earth metals, thus providing equal access for development to the states (Liptako-Gourma, 2024; Golovko, 2021). The aims of the «mission» had not been changing until the rise of terrorist activities and reformation of mission into the organisation as it exists today.
Nevertheless, the «mission» had little impact on the unification of its participants (Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso) and did not contribute to the regional peacebuilding or stabilisation, thus facing a number of political crises. In 1985 Mali and Burkina Faso engaged in war over the control of mineral resources in Agacher Strip, which had to be prevented by the UN mission as resource control was its direct responsibility. The similar conflict between the countries already took place in 1974 over access to the water resources in the Agacher Strip, however it was mediated by the Organisation of African Unity and International Court of Justice without participation of the UN mission (Pflieger et al., 2016). The second conflict over the resources became a military one for 4 days and was mediated by the Court of Justice (ibid.). As a result, the resources were called to be in equal access for both countries, consequently, neither resolving the conflict, nor preventing the future one. Meanwhile, the UN mission had no impact on the flow of the conflict, albeit the causes of war were in its direct responsibility. Thus, inferring that during the conflicts between participants of the mission, regardless of the statute, the UN mission had no influence over the members’ actions and mediation of the conflict.
Apart from conflicts between states, all of them had internal instability, such as rebellions and military coups. With the constant political instability, integration projects as well as economic development are hardly possible to achieve. McGowan (2003) provides a table of all military coups in African countries from 1956 to 2001. Prior to the 2000s Mali faced a military coup only in 1991, which was successful, leading to overthrow of the dictatorship and establishment of elections. Yet, despite the low number of military coups Mali still faced 15 military interventions. Niger faced 5 military coups (1974, ‘76, ‘83, ‘96, ‘99), 3 of which were successful, simultaneously accompanied by 22 military interventions in 40 years. As for Burkina Faso, it faced 6 military coups (1974, ‘80, ‘82, ‘83, ‘83, ‘87), with only 1 resulting in failure. Among the three states Burkina Faso was the state with the highest number of interventions – 39 (McGowan, 2003). Thus, in comparative perspective Mali had suffered the least from political instability than Niger or Burkina Faso. However, the frequency at which political instability happens within the state makes the country highly vulnerable to experience the cascade of regime change, as during the 1980s in Burkina Faso. As the states experience constant regime change (9 successful regime changes in summary for 3 countries), the idea of integration (or at least cooperation) is deemed for failure. The partners become unreliable and may even become hostile during the regime change, which is an explanation for resource conflicts between Mali and Burkina Faso regardless of their participation in the UN mission. 
Hence, in case of early development of the Liptako-Gourma Authority at the level of the UN led mission, it was highly ineffective. Firstly, the mission had no impact on the interstate affairs in the field the mission was intended to tackle in the first place. The Agacher Strip war over resource extraction at borders was mediated by the OAU and the Court of Justice, excluding any influence of the mission dedicated to resolving the issue. Thus, proving it highly ineffective and absent of influence to change behaviour of the state. Secondly, during the early stages of the development, the mission was incapable of addressing the resource problems of the participants due to frequent changes in governments and, consequently, in political trajectories. Preventing military coups and interventions had a higher level of importance rather than participation in a UN mission that requires cooperation with a neighbouring country, whose government was recently overthrown by rebels. Therefore, the Liptako-Gourma Authority prior to the 2000s had no institutional or practical impact on affairs between its future member states.
ECOWAS
ECOWAS is an international organisation consisting of west African states with the primary goal of mutual economic development. ECOWAS (also commonly referred to as «Economic Community») was established by the Lagos Treaty in 1975, stating its major goals and core institutions. Initially the organisation intended to focus purely on economic development. In the Lagos Treaty neither security, nor environmental regulations were present – the organisation positioned itself no more than an economic integration project (ECOWAS, 1975). To increase economic cooperation of the countries ECOWAS from 1979 to the end of 1980s implemented the Protocol Relating to the Free Movement of Person, Residence and Establishment in three phases. The agreement eased the travelling between the ECOWAS member states’ borders for their residents, which was intended to encourage exchange of businesses between countries (ECOWAS, 1985). Later the organisation signed the Protocol on Free Movement of Persons that would increase security among the member states and set control over the people that were passing by introduction of «residence cards» (ECOWAS, 1990). The organisation did focus on economic integration and pursued the goal of mutual development among states. However, throughout the history of the organisation it faced a number of security challenges coming from the terrorist groups, which encouraged the organisation to create new institutions, initiatives and policies to ensure stability and security within ECOWAS member states. 
In 1976 the organisation launched a security integration alongside with the economic one by adopting Protocol on non-recourse force by Member-States of the Community. According to the agreement member states were forbidden from assisting or attacking in any way (economic, political) any other member of the integration project (United Nations, 1999). Later the protocol became the agreement on non-aggression in 1978. Thus, the non-aggression agreement became a starting point for ECOWAS in widening its scope of interests from exclusively economic to security affairs. Consequently, in order to maintain stability in the region the organisation created the special monitoring military group (ECOMOG) in 1990. The ECOWAS military group consists of the militias that are sent by the member states and initially was established as an attempt to prevent the military coup in Liberia (Jooji, 2017). However, the group was then often used by the organisation during interventions into ECOWAS member states, always with the aim of either battling terrorist groups or military groups within (Medu & Sanubi, 2023). The ECOWAS intervention in Liberia in the 1990s failed due to insufficient resources and lack of coordination among participants of the organisation (Ofuatey‐Kodjoe, 1994). Later in 1997 ECOWAS reattempted to intervene into internal affairs of Liberia ending up with the divided government, instability within Liberia and disagreements among organisation’s member states on policies and actions of ECOWAS (Ogwuche & Serah, 2010).
Apart from intervention in Liberia, ECOMOG was used during a number of other cases prior to the beginning of the 20th century. In 1998 ECOMOG was deployed during the Guinea-Bissau civil war for peacekeeping purposes and control over the elections. Nevertheless, in 1999 ECOWAS was obliged to interfere, since a new civil war erupted. Still the organisation was unable to secure its interests in Guinea-Bissau, therefore resulting in wider criticism of the organisation. Important to say that the causes of civil wars that ECOWAS was participating in are majorly connected to the terrorist groups (Jalo, 2023). One of the major issues in the Sahel region remains arms trafficking by terrorist groups, which empowers rebels and decreases the ability of ECOWAS member states to maintain control over their territories, in turn leading to civil wars (ibid). The instability that the terrorist groups cause forces ECOWAS to provide any response, therefore protecting its interests in economic development.
Finally, in 1993 ECOWAS revised its treaty making the biggest institutional change in the history of the organisation. The main change of the reform was in the institutional perception of the organisation. Before 1993 ECOWAS according to the Lagos Treaty, it was an economic organisation without intentions of engaging in regional peacekeeping. The reform not only added military cooperation to the vision of ECOWAS integration, but combined economy and security (ECOWAS, 1993). Thus, building a secure environment through military integration was seen as the basis for further economic development (Halidu, Cornelius, & Olaiya, 2024).  In addition to the inclusion of security challenges, the organisation expanded its scope of economic activities towards cooperation in agriculture, infrastructure and environmental policies. The organisation also set goals for 15 years, the time during which the organisation should achieve establishment of the Monetary Union. As a result, ECOWAS had developed as both an economic and a security organisation. Yet it put economic affairs as the main focus, whereas security is considered as necessary to overcome obstacles, rather than an area that member states willingly cooperate in. 
Prior to the 2000s ECOWAS was developing both economically and politically. The organisation followed its initial goal of economic development and successfully implemented respective policies. Yet due to the rising threat of the terrorism and spread of terrorist groups, the organisation was forced to take on the military function and commence interventions to its member states. The interventions (and military policies overall) were criticised by the members themselves for questionable success or even pursuit of hegemonic position by Nigeria (Dennis & Brown, 2018). However, the final decisions of the organisation are the representation of interests demonstrated by the member states. In case there was an opposition within the organisation or discontent regarding launching intervention, the opposing side would have voted against, thus preventing it. Therefore, the actions of the economic organisation are the depiction of common interests of its member states. The need for the establishment of a secure environment before enhancing economic development is rational because otherwise military coups or civil wars would force states in the region to economically diverge from the common agenda.
Making primary conclusions, the organisations initially had different trajectories of development under the pressure of terrorism. However, regardless of the initial plans of the organisations, be that economic development or environmental protection, they still were forced either to change policies under the influence of terrorism or to establish new institutions that tackle security issues. Terrorism limits development of integration projects in a number of ways. It acts as the direct military threat to the current regime, with the disposition of which economic achievements and environmental regulations would be neglected. Although not all the regime changes are explained by terrorism, it still plays a role in rallying support of rebel groups and empowering them through borderless arms trade. On the one hand, some organisations, such as ECOWAS or Lake Chad Basin Commission, responded to the spreading terrorism with creation of military forces (ECOMOG and MNJTF), which include member states and directly aim at dealing with terrorist issues and protecting borders. G5 Sahel by itself already was a response to the terrorist attacks in Mali, also being an example of forced participation of countries in the region in security affairs. On the other hand, the changes within the approach towards the core issue of the organisation also were present. Lake Chad Basin Commission and ECOWAS adjusted their initial economic and environmental policies to also cover the issues of security. Thus, LCBC introduced the project of water management to empower borders and prevent spread of terrorism. ECOWAS, meanwhile, changed the way of economic cooperation, imposing limits on arms trading and sharing information of movements of people. Nevertheless, there is a failed case of Liptako-Gourma Authority at its «mission» stage of development, being unable to mediate the conflict that it was supposed to prevent in the first place. Hence, inferring that the development of the international organisations was significantly influenced by the terrorist actions in Sahel region from the perspective of institutional response and necessity of changes it created. 
Chapter 2. Analysis of institutional evolutions
2.1 Analysis of organisations’ institutional evolution in 21st century
G5 Sahel
As was discussed the G5 Sahel was created for the purposes of bringing stability into its member states through establishment of cooperation between them and France as a leading agent in the organisation. Since its creation, G5 Sahel was heavily financed by the European Union due to French participation in the organisation. El Khou (2019) argues that from G5 establishment to 2020, the EU has provided €8 billion to enhance internal security of all member states, secure their border and counter terrorist activities in the region. In addition, based on the questionable success of the operations, the funds for the organisation were gradually increasing. However, the heavy funding had no impact on the outcomes of the operations, since G5 Sahel also suffered from the issues of corruption and long bureaucratic processes (Welz, 2022). Therefore, the organisation throughout its existence, even with the assistance of the great powers and international institutions, had little success in establishing a secure environment. What is more, the alliances among terrorist groups that France aimed to eliminate grew stronger under the attempts of G5 Sahel. Thus, although the organisation had no issues with the funding and consequently resources in possession, the integration project still failed in achieving its major goal. Accordingly, the issues might have been either within institutional structure that could not provide an effective mechanism to resolve security problems or due to inefficient exchange of information among member states that international organisations by their definitions should overcome or at least decrease.
The institutional structure of the organisation had little changes in 10 years of its full-fledged operational activities. Yet, they do act as a representation of the changing nature of the organisation, which was influenced by the security matters in the region. In 2014 after the creation of the organisation, the Development and Security Strategy was adopted, establishing four pillars that G5 Sahel was based on: governance, infrastructure/resilience, security, human development (Alliance Sahel, 2020). To achieve the set goals in each pillar, the organisation adopted the Priority Investment Programme (PIP), which was aimed at distributing incoming funds among the fields of interest of the organisation. The Programme focused distribution of the funds majorly at defence and governance spheres, intending for achievements to trickle down to the resilience and human development spheres, therefore making development in all pillars, while only focusing on two of them. In addition, the Programme allowed for the open investments in G5 Sahel from any actors willing to assist, however majorly it regulated the relations between the G5r Sahel and the EU investments (Sandor et al., 2024). The EU created its own Development and Security Strategy to assess the success of operations in G5 Sahel (ibid.). In 2014 the integration project had no major development in security of development spheres, since during the year of establishment it was focused on planning the usage of funds for the following years and operations to conduct. Still, in 2014 the increased cooperation with the European Union and African Union as the international agents can be seen, implying the growing significance of the G5 Sahel as a security actor.
G5 Sahel upon its creation as the organisation that is able to bring peace to the region already gathered plenty of attention from actors from and beyond the region. The member states of the organisation act as rational agents, therefore for them participation in any integration project, especially the one funded by other institutions would bring satisfactory results. Niger by the time the organisation was created was already a member of ECOWAS, Lake Chad basin Commission, and Liptako-Gourma Authority. Therefore, the state was benefiting from all of the international institutions in terms of funding. Same can be applied to Mali and Burkina Faso, both of which also focused on multilateralism in their international relations. The participation of West African countries in G5 Sahel also can be explained by the actual need for a secure environment. West Africa is notorious for the number of military coups and rebels started by local ethnic groups, leading to the change in the regime. As the regime changes, it desires to stay in power for as long as it is possible. Therefore, to ensure its survival, the regime addresses the most sensitive spheres of its power – security and economic stability. G5 is the security organisation, therefore providing not only funds, but also equipment and intelligence networks to increase the success of operations. Consequently, in case of African states the rationale of participation lies within acquiring as much benefit (funds, governance, security, development, etc.) as possible for little expenses, since they are either distributed among the members (e.g. LCBC) or provided by other bodies (e.g. G5 Sahel sponsored by the EU). 
The participation of France in G5, in turn, is explained by its desire to maximise control and security over the region. West African states primarily were french colonies, therefore they act as the available markets for France. The insecurity within the region, and terrorist activities hinder French influence in the region in several ways. Firstly, since France is unable to protect its former colonies and the market (which would benefit all of the parties), it is highly criticised and not welcomed in the region, thus losing its influence. Secondly, if the West African states are able to deal with the terrorist issues through cooperation on security matters, then France will also lose its influence and presence in the region, which is the opposite of maximisation of benefit. The development of ECOWAS as a security actor through ECOMOG and later legitimisation of interventions, participation of African Union as well as the creation of Lake Chad Basin Commission military forces created contention for power vacuum in the region. For France in order not to lose the influence and access to Sahel markets, it was significantly important to establish a security organisation that would pose itself as the main military actor in the region, therefore engaging in competition with other international actors. What is more, the perception of France as the actor that would bring stability through assistance, rather than conquest, would greatly increase its positive perception by African states. Hence, for France participation in and funding G5 Sahel as for 2014 was a maximisation of utility, rather than wasteful race for influence in the region. 
The following year the organisation commenced to widen its security and military partnerships with international organisations. In 2015 G5 Sahel established the «Military partnership for cross-border cooperation» (PCMS) with the assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) (ECFR, 2018). The ultimate goal of the PCMS was to strengthen the border control and deal with the drugs trafficking and transnational organised crimes in the region. The partnership provided specialised training activities and assisted countries in resource provision (including firearms) to enhance control over their borders (United Nations, 2016). Moreover, the PCMS consulted individual countries on adjustment of laws, fighting corruption, and governmental regulations that would improve the joint attempts in fighting terrorism (ibid.). Apart from addressing border security of its member states, G5 Sahel the same year with UNODC established the «Security Cooperation Platform» (PMCT) aimed at providing and sharing intelligence among the African countries. Consequently, making the common attempts of tacking terrorist attacks coordinated, and thus more efficient (EU, 2018; UN, 2016). 
The major institutional development of G5 Sahel happened in 2017 as the organisation formed the G5 Joint Force (FC-G5S) – military force consisting of personnel provided by every member state. The goal of the military group creation was to prevent development and spread of military groups (including terrorist organisations) across the region (UNHRC, 2022). The military force was highly endorsed by the international community, including the African Union, France, the United States, the EU, and the UN, Security Council of which has unanimously agreed on the creation of military force (UNHRC, 2022). The United States supported the military force with the weapons (arms, drones) and intelligence regarding positions of the terrorist groups (Dieng, 2019). The EU provided approximately €50 mln. for the establishment and provision of equipment to the military personnel (El Khou, 2019), whereas the United States directly gave the G5 Sahel members a total of $60 mln. (Dieng, 2019). 
The same year the FC-G5S launched a first military operation in the area of the border intersection of three countries (Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso). The Joint Force authorisation allows for military units to cross borders and operate within the set area, regardless of political demarcations. Accord (2018) published an analytical report on the success of the G5 Sahel Joint Military Forces, in which the main argument implies that the Joint Force was not set goal particular enough to succeed. The overall idea of «battling armed groups» had no clear understanding of which exact groups to fight with and how exactly to address them. Therefore, the Hawbi operation in 2017 led to the number of false arrests and failed attempts to distinguish between terrorist groups and the civilian population. The second operation (Pagnali) resulted in mass migration of civilians from the area of conducting the operations (Accord, 2018). In addition, Dieng (2019) asserts that the G5 Sahel was «reduced to its joint force», which could be seen from the investment flows. Indeed, initially the international actors funded G5 Sahel as the organisation that tackle terrorism through a variety of means, establishing cooperation agreements, addressing institutional issues, and adjusting policies. However, as the military group was established, all the funds from partners were sent to the military group, leaving the base organisation behind. Therefore, since 2017 as the organisation focused on tackling terrorist threats by military means (which had considerable success), the institutional field was neglected and eventually had no effect on the organisational operations. G5 Sahel became the military group in its sense sponsored heavily by the US and the EU and assisted alongside by France. 
The results of shifting to the military approach of the organisation is seen in the further years (2018 – 2022). During this time period, all of the policies adopted by the organisation were dedicated to the empowerment of current military capabilities. Firstly, the organisation created the Sahelian College, designed to train military units that after graduation would join the G5 military forces (G5 Sahel Defence College, 2025). The college also commenced engagement in partnership with NATO – major military alliance that sponsors the college. Therefore, redirecting even more funds to the military sphere, rather than institutional capacity-building (Abrahamsen, 2018). Secondly, the organisation set the Sahel Trust Fund to attract more investments to maintain military personnel and sponsor operations in the region (ECFR, 2018; United Nations, 2020). This allowed the integration project to diversify investors and gather a higher budget to spend on military activities. Thirdly, from 2018 to 2022 (time period provided for project and implementation) the G5 organisation was establishing the Sahelian Centre for Threat Analysis and Early Warning to share intelligence on the movement of armed groups and protect civilians (G5 Sahel, 2018). Fourthly, as the organisation started engaging in military activities, it established partnership with INTERPOL for exchanging information and acquiring professional assistance in case of need (Interpol, 2020). Finally, the funding of the organisation remained limited to the international support and major dependency on the European Union, which engaged in military capacity building, rather than letting local countries do it. Consequently, the narrow focus on military issues and establishment of military security through regular army led to the poor institutional design and lack of focus on civil projects (Tull, 2017). The countries of the organisation gave up their sovereignty not only to the participants of the organisation, but also to the international actors, including the US and the EU, leading to higher vulnerabilities.
The interests of the states as well as sponsors was reduced from development of the underdeveloped areas through institutional and security projects to establishment of a secure environment by military activities. Such an approach provides successful short-term results with revolts and military groups being suppressed. Alas, in the long-term perspective military stability is not an answer, since the rebel forces would strike back due to lack of social policies, while military suppression would only worsen it. Hence, the shift of the G5 Sahel to the military only organisation not only limited its scope of operations, but also backfired, leading to the mass uprisings within the states, and terrorist groups empowerment at the borders of the integration project participants. Since the West African states are considered to be among the most underdeveloped, thus being unable to sponsor themselves military operations (Dağ, 2023: 158), participation on G5 Sahel was a benefit for them. However, to gain funds and security the states have to contribute to the project, which resulted in countries sacrificing sovereignty for benefits of the organisation. Thus, military personnel could trespass borders of member states in case of military operations as well as attack armed groups without guarantee of the group being related to the terrorist groups. As a result, the African states are faced with the choice: manage and fund security affairs themselves without engagement of international actors (e.g. ECOWAS, LCBC, AU) or delegate the management to the actors external from the region and let the international actors fund the operations. Hence, narrowing down the issue to «the funding side manages the conflict», which West African states decided to be managed by France and the European Union. 
In the 2020s the G5 Sahel lost its operational power due to withdrawal of its member states and decrease in financing from the main partners. In 2022 Mali withdrew from the organisation (UNSC, 2023) due to a number of reasons, all of which related to the G5 Sahel operations. First and foremost, a military coup played its role, after the change of regime. The Malian government withdrew from integration projects (including ECOWAS) and followed isolationism from external participation (Dağ, 2023: 157). Secondly, the withdrawal of Mali and the military coups in the first place are explained by the results of G5 Sahel actions. Since the creation of the organisation, the member states were highly dependent on the management from the French side. As G5 was funded (thus governed) by European countries, the operations and their success also depended on it, therefore neglecting the actions of the member states within the organisation. Consequently, the reasons for the military coup in Mali to begin in 2021 are explained by absence of territorial control (Lyammouri, 2021: 4). The organisation through military operations and partnerships could not establish a secure environment, leading to three overthrows of G5 Sahel member states – Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger. The military coups in the former two countries (in 2022 and 2023 respectively) are explained analogically. Hence, the new governments of three states withdrew from integration projects they were members of and created the Alliance of Sahel states – military organisation aimed at establishing a secure environment within its members. What is more, Chad as one of two remaining member states of the organisation have negative impact towards the external influence within the domestic affairs (Dağ, 2023: 153). The state is not willing to engage in military operations, therefore reducing the operational capacity of the organisation to one member state. 
The development of G5 Sahel can be divided into two periods: development of the organisation prior to 2017, and military operations that led to degradation of the integration project. During the first period, member states and international actors were highly engaged in the institutional building and implementing the changes of policies. G5 Sahel every year launched new partnerships that not only attracted more funds but also provided professional assistance to local administrations on how best to improve governance. The participants regional and international both benefited from the development of G5 Sahel. Member states of G5 were assisted with governance, security issues, border control and financial problems, covered by the EU and the US. Meanwhile, external actors gained image and influence over the regions, which also is an achievement of their goals. The organisation since the beginning operated only on funds provided by investors. To attract more funds for future operations, the organisation had to expand and show the results. Therefore, the most prominent G5 project was implemented in 2017 as the military group was created. 
With the new military group, the organisation could increase its focus on more visible policies (military operations) with the immediate outcomes. The shift towards military cooperation is rational for both sides. African countries could secure their borders with low accountability to investors because operations were supervised by France. What is more, G5 members were gaining international material support from a wide variety of actors (states & organisations) in forms of arms or funds. France, in turn, benefited from the military operations, as they not only directly represent the success of the military group, but also directly address the issue the organisation focuses on. France undertook the approach of establishing a secure environment first and then managing economic development. However, such an approach resulted in loss of territorial control by G5 members, ineffective war on arms trade and consequent withdrawal of its member states due to military takeovers.
Hence, on the one hand, the terrorist activities were the reasons for creation of G5 Sahel. The 2012 Tuareg rebellion in Mali significantly supported by the armed terrorist groups in the region encouraged the regional actors to cooperate, thus establishing G5. The initial social policies, investments, and partnerships with various agencies were aimed at dealing with terrorist issues within the countries. The creation of the military group is the direct response to the terrorist activities, which could not be fought with through the established partnerships and social policies the G5 was implementing prior to 2017. The further developments of the organisation in their majority, as was mentioned above, are related to the military policies. The organisation that initially approached fighting terrorism through a number of policies, focused on one single mean – military operations against terrorist groups, which resulted in a questionable success. On the other hand, terrorist activities resulted in the failure of the organisation. Terrorist groups supported the military takeovers in the G5 member states, leading to their withdrawal and making the organisation dysfunctional. The states that withdrew from the organisation established their own military alliance to protect themselves from terrorist attacks. Thus, implying that terrorism in the region although encouraged African states to cooperate on security agreements, yet greatly limited the success of their military operations in the region. The organisation became highly militarised, neglecting social and economic policies, and dedicating funds and institutional capacity to direct military clashes with terrorist groups.
Lake Chad Basin Commission
Throughout the first quarter of the 21st century the LCBC have been significantly developing not only in economic, social and environmental spheres, but also as a peacekeeper in the region. In the beginning of the century, the organisation adopted the vision of what it should accomplish by 2025 with short- and long-term goals. The short-term goals are set to ensure control over borders and «prepare the framework for integrated water management» (Lake Chad Basin Commission, 2000). The long-term goals in turn set enhanced partnership with organisations and implementation of programmes as the main goals (ibid.). Thus, the LCBC set their major and primary goals to be environment and economic development, rather than peacebuilding, although marking it as necessary to boost achievement of the goals. During the mid-2000s the LCBC was implementing the projects set before, however had no significant institutional changes that would have influenced the structure of operations of the integration project. 
Nevertheless, in 2008 the organisation expanded as Libya gained its membership in the LCBC. The same year the integration project initiated the institutional reconstruction, as all the bodies were assessed by their efficiency and restructured if needed, uniting all the changes in the second reform 2008 – 2011. First of all, the reform was aimed at improving efficiency of the directors (Galeazzi et al., 2017: 9). After the reform the directors could be chosen internationally, thus not being limited to a region or countries, and were appointed based on their merit, rather than national belonging (Appolinaire et al., 2012: 80). Yet, the decision to increase the number of directors was argued to be controversial, since it led to increased costs of the organisation, simultaneously without increasing the output of the LCBC (Galeazzi et al., 2017: 9). Secondly, during the reform the LCBC created two new bodies: the Central Department and the Consultative Committee (Appolinaire et al., 2012: 81). Both of the organs act as mediators between agencies within the organisation, where the Central Department coordinates actions between all the bodies within the organisation, whereas the Consultative Committee provides consultations to the Council of Ministers on certain topics. Therefore, the new bodies were expected to enhance the exchange of information within the organisation among its major bodies. Thirdly, in 2011 the organisation adopted a new water charter, which regulated the actions of the LCBC member states in the environmental sphere (LCBC, 2011). The Charter included such areas as intelligence sharing, disaster prevention, implementation of the pollution-tax, and a number of policies to protect water resources in the Lake Chad Basin. The Charter became a major guideline for the LCBC member states’ future resource management in the region. The charter also covers the security issues, however only as a plan for action, in case of «disasters caused by human activities …  if such disasters are likely to cause harmful effects in other Basin countries» (ibid.). Thus, the charter significantly focused on addressing environmental and developmental problems, rather than security issues, since it was not the main scope of the organisation by 2011.
Finally, in 2009 the organisation initiated several projects dedicated to the management of water resources, for which the European Union invested €2.5 bln., thus gathering more funds for development of the organisation (Appolinaire et al., 2012: 82). In addition, several projects were launched, such as a project to reduce diseases (HIV/AIDS) and the sustainable development program of Lake Chad (ibid.). The later project was implemented from 2011 to 2017 under the financial assistance and supervision of the German Agency for International Cooperation (Onana Ibogo, 2023: 4). After the reform, the organisation will increase its reliance on funds from non-member states. The reform initially was launched to not only update the establishing charter (Galeazzi et al., 2017: 9), but also to review the future projects and main postulates of the organisation, linked to the water resources management (Azu & Inyikalum, 2024: 103). Hence, the major institutional reform of the Lake Chad Basin Commission was focused on enhancing cooperation in economic, environmental and social areas. The reform had no mentions regarding the terrorist issues or the need to secure borders for economic development. The 2008 – 2011 reform was not commenced due to terrorist activities, but rather to restructure the organisation to increase its efficiency and set priorities for future development.
Meanwhile, in contrast to the G5 Sahel, which incorporated the military operations and later switched completely to a security organisation, the Lake Chad Basin Commission tackled the security issues, yet separately. In 2009 the terrorist threats posed by armed groups and especially Boko Haram in northern Nigeria forced the LCBC to recall the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF). In order to continue the developmental projects, the states were obliged to increase their security capabilities, since the terrorist groups started operating in the region, where the projects should have been carried out (Obamamoye, 2017: 5). Yet, by 2012 the MNJTF only had a mandate to operate within the case of Boko Haram and was not intended as the military instrument to tackle the terrorist groups, since the anti-terrorism was not a major goal of the LCBC (Albert, 2017: 124). The military force was intended only to secure the area around the lake Chad and protect the Nigerian northern provinces in order not to create spillover of instability to the neighbouring states. 
Nonetheless, as the attempts to establish order in Northern Nigeria proceeded, the MNJTF members agreed that the joint military forces were required to battle all the armed groups on the borders of the member states. As the initial attempts to battle Boko Haram in Nigeria failed, the situation allowed terrorist groups to trade arms across the neighbouring borders, thus facilitating attacks on borders. Moreover, the insecurity created at the borders forced mass migration, most of which happened in Cameroon (Albert, 2017: 124). Hence, after the attacks on the MNJTF headquarters, the military group was fully restored under a new mandate and new goal (African Union, 2015). According to the newly adopted mandate, the MNJTF increased its personnel, targeted Boko Haram in order to prevent further spreading and, most importantly, gave the governance of the MNJTF to the Lake Chad Basin Commission (Albert, 2017: 124; African Union, 2015). What is more, the military group also was responsible for humanitarian operations, management of migration flows over borders and ensuring compliance with the human rights at the borders (Aniekwe & Brooks, 2023).
Prior to 2015 and the new mandate, the MNJTF was operating as the joint military group, with every country dedicating a certain number of personnel, thus uniting it in one army, yet under separate supervision. In case of insecurity, one of the participants could assist a country in need by sending military troops to the required area. Furthermore, the military group had no institutional structure, as it was believed to be managed by each country separately, although giving preferences to the actions of the LCBC. Since 2015, the MNJTF became fully controlled and managed by the LCBC, thus significantly expanding the organisational institutional capacities. The further development of the LCBC in the non-military sphere was dedicated to the implementation of set projects on management of water resources and achievement of sustainable development in the region. Yet, the institutional changes from 2015 were dedicated only to the security affairs and cooperation in the sphere. Thus, demonstrating the need for institutional adjustment of military instruments both in terms of cooperation and management.
In 2018 the LCBC launched the Lake Chad Basin Regional Strategy for Stabilisation, Recovery and Resilience, which focused on implementation of a single military strategy towards the regional security affairs for the MNJTF members (Aniekwe & Brooks, 2023; LCBC, 2018). The document established the reasons for interventions, which are related to both human and environmental security issues. The organisation was set to prevent flow of arms, human migration, and foster disarmament with the aim of fighting Boko Haram and reducing military capabilities of the armed group. The document also tackles the spheres of political cooperation, necessity to establish rule of law, and empower low-income groups as the most vulnerable (LCBC, 2018). The operations of the MNJTF initially after 2015 were given to the LCBC Secretariat, thus overflowing the body with work. Consequently, to separate the functions, the new bodies within the MNJTF were created: the Steering Committee (highest organ, accountable to the LCBC Council), Regional Stabilization Strategy Secretariat (assisting organ to the Steering Committee), Technical Units and military forces led by governors of respective area (LCBC, 2018). The structure was fully implemented in 2019 as was proposed by the Regional Strategy (Aniekwe & Brooks, 2023). In addition, the budgeting and donors were also separated from the LCBC in order not to hinder the process of environmental projects implementation. The Security Strategy became the first full-fledged regulating document on military cooperation that was adopted by the LCBC. The document clearly defined the spheres of cooperation, how the operations are to be financed, and what the organisation expected the results to be. The structure was also created, yet put separately from the LCBC bodies, which alleviated the dependence of both organs on each other, making the LCBC institutional strategy different from the one of G5 Sahel.     
In 2020 the LCBC divided the scope of military operations between 4 sectors (Aniekwe & Brooks, 2023), each of which is assigned to a certain area within a country: Cameroon, Chad, Nigeria, Niger (MNJTF, 2020). This allowed the organisation for more effective personnel management and movement of troops. In 2021 the military group established a partnership with the RNI radio to spread the important information quickly (Aniekwe & Brooks, 2023). Since 2021 the LCBC has had no significant institutional changes within either the organisation or the MNJTF. 
Hence, the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) throughout the 21st century had developed as an environmental, economic, and security organisation. The LCBC always put its major focus on the environmental management and protection of water resources in the Lake Basin area. Although in the 2010s the organisation significantly expanded and added the military component to the cooperation between member states, still the policies were aimed at protection of the civilian population, rather than direct combat with terrorist threats. From the point of view of liberal intergovernmentalism framework, the integration and participation in the projects was highly beneficial for the majority of the member states. The major beneficiaries and contributors are the founding members of the LCBC: Cameroon, Niger, Nigeria, Chad. The 4 countries get access to higher resources through mutual coordinated management and higher possibilities for security management as the costs and personnel is shared and provided by each member state. It should be mentioned that Nigeria is an exceptional case, as the state also is considered to be a leader of ECOWAS, providing the biggest share of army and funds to the ECOMOG operations. Therefore, for Nigeria, it is highly crucial to alleviate the financial pressure on maintaining security in its northern provinces, which is achieved through the LCBC. The other three members mostly benefit by containing spreading terrorism and security borders, thus also promoting higher security engagement between member states. 
The LCBC member states that joined the organisation later – CAR and Libya have less benefits from the LCBC operations. The projects of the organisation primarily focus on the Lake Chad Basin, which is located at the border intersection of the 4 founding members. Therefore, CAR and Libya do not have increased gains from the LCBC operations. Nonetheless, the countries are still members, thus fund the LCBC activities, therefore implying that although 2 countries do not gain anything from the environmental projects, they still have higher benefit from the security operations. Terrorism in Sahel has a widespread coverage, which is not limited to the Liptako-Gourma and Lake Chad Basin areas. Therefore, for Libya and CAR, participation in the LCBC is an opportunity to engage in multilateral negotiations with neighbouring countries, accordingly, increasing their borders with the LCBC founding members. The borders of the two countries are in its majority located in the deserts, therefore creating a number of obstacles to protect them. Thus, in order not to let the terrorist groups reach the unprotected borders, the most rational choice for an actor would be to sponsor the neighbouring countries that would act as the protecting wall. Whereas, the founding states gain funds from participation of CAR and Libya, creating the absolute gains situation. Thus, inferring that the LCBC by 2024 became an environmental organisation with the military body that had institutional capabilities to ensure security within the organisation’s sectors of interest. 
Liptako-Gourma Authority
The Liptako-Gourma Authority (LGA) as the organisation officially was announced by the Heads of the States in 2000. And already in the beginning of the 21st century, LGA was gaining organisational features, starting with the institutional structure, ending up with partnerships and agreement with other actors. In addition, the organisation established and revised its establishing treaty, thus enhancing the cooperation among the states. In 2000 LGA revised its establishing treaty calling the organisation «Integrated Development Authority of the Liptako-Gourma Region» and setting 3 major bodies of the organisation: Conference of Heads of States (consultation body), Council of Ministers (decision-making body), General Directorate (executive body) (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2000). The document also sets the budgeting of the organisation and infrastructure related to withdrawal from the organisation. In 2001 the organisation revised the General Resolution that defined the processes within the organisation and established the mandate of LGA. The major goals posed by the organisation in the document are resource management, cooperation of energy infrastructure and mutual economic development (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2001). In addition, the document states that the future projects of the organisation can go beyond the borders of a single member state, therefore placing LGA above sovereignty of its members. Still the decision-making process is unanimous, and the programs that can go beyond borders are related to the economic and social spheres, rather than political and security ones. Therefore, the organisational capabilities in case of disagreement were still limited and could be contested by any member state (ibid.). Hence, although the organisation did not tackle the security issues, already in the beginning of the 21st century, it established institutional structure, budgeting and started managing the resources and economic affairs among the member states.
The institutional structure of the LGA increased in the same year as the organisation adopted the «Revised Internal Regulations of the General Directorate of the Integrated Development Authority of the Liptako-Gourma Region», which greatly expanded the institutional structure of the organisation. As a result of the Revised regulations, the Council of Ministers gained the assisting body «Statutory Audit» and three departments were created under the governance of the Directorate General: Department of Rural Development, Department of Administration and Finance, Department of Industrial and Mining Infrastructures (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2001). The newly established departments became the depiction of focus areas, in which the member states were willing to cooperate and enhance integration. During the same year, 2001, the organisation adopted a number of documents, dedicated to the establishment of formalities regarding salaries, how the personnel are appointed and the main postulates of each of the departments. One of the agreements was revisionary, changing the location of Headquarters and the procedures, through which the government can address issues within the organisation, thus creating the arbitration mechanism. In addition, the organisation set the projects for future development and distributed budgeting among the established departments (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2001). 
Apart from restructuralisation, the LGA was establishing a number of partnerships with neighbouring organisations and unions. Thus, in 2005 the organisation signed the Memorandum of Understanding (Mou) with the CENSAD (European Council on Foreign Relations, 2025) and in 2011 with WAEMU. Thus, the organisation established diplomatic relations with organisations allowing for further deepening of cooperation. In 2013 Liptako-Gourma Authority signed the «Cross-border Cooperation Agreement» with ECOWAS, although members of LGA were already members of ECOWAS, thus making some of the agreements highly questionable. Nevertheless, the number of agreements with the regional organisations demonstrate the internationalisation of LGA and the determination of its member states to widen possible areas of cooperation.
In 2011 at the 7th Conference of Heads of States of the Liptako-Gourma Authority in Niger, the organisation was expanded and became the economic sphere. Despite the pre-existing documents, agreements and the institutional structure, the organisation did not cover economic integration by the Heads of the States until 2011. The main reason for LGA to incorporate full-fledged economic cooperation was the fact that its mandate was extended to cover the whole area of Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso (Grütjen, 2024). Yet, from 2011 to 2017 the organisation had no significant institutional changes in economic and resource management spheres.
By 2017 the Liptako-Gourma Authority had no mentions or considerations of the terrorist activities. Although the members did engage in peacebuilding and military projects with the LCBC, G5 Sahel or ECOWAS, still the LGA remained a purely economic organisation. Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger had no incentives to create another military organisation and increase expenses, taking into account that the LGA is already surrounded by three of them. What is more, three countries participate in the regional military projects, thus making the creation of military institutions within the LGA a low-benefit project. As the rational actors, three african states decided to focus on resource management and economic cooperation among each other, as the security issues are tackled by the neighbouring organisations. 
In 2017 the Liptako-Gourma Authority revised its treaty, appending cooperation in the security sphere. Firstly, in the Article 6 of the document, the missions of the organisation are listed, where the development and facilitation of cross-border exchange priorities were required to «meet the security challenges in the region» (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2017). Secondly, the revised treaty added a new body, Executive Secretariat, and changed the powers of Conference of Heads of States and Council of Ministers, where the former took on the decision-making role. The Council of Ministers, in turn became the supervision organ, responsible for insurance of policy implementation. The Executive body replaced the General Directorate and became the executive organ of the LGA. Important to say that although the ministers of defence joined the LGA Council of Ministers, the security decisions that the ministers agreed on, were transmitted to the Executive Secretariat only after the review of the Heads of the States. Thus, the organisation implemented the security sphere but made the security policies significantly harder to pass in order to ensure compliance of all the member states. Thirdly, the organisation gained the mandate to exercise the «security measures» in its member states to ensure achievement of the objectives (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2017).  
Finally, along with the revised treaty, the LGA created a project of the multinational joint forces to address the issues of terrorist activities. Yet, the project was not implemented, since the G5 Sahel military group had already covered the goals that the LGA military group was aiming at (Koné, 2022). However, since the creation of a military group by LGA was highly ineffective, because LGA member states already participated in G5 Sahel, the Liptako-Gourma Authority signed the agreement of cooperation with G5 Sahel in 2018. The agreement on cooperation encouraged the LGA member states to share intelligence and support G5 Sahel forces during its military operations against terrorist groups in the region (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2018). In addition, the agreement sought to join similar projects of two organisations, implying greater interaction and cooperation between the organisations and their member states (ibid.). 
Hence, as the organisation was developing and its member states were facing a number of security challenges, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso unanimously agreed on securitisation of the Liptako-Gourma Authority. Prior to the revised treaty, the member states participated in military activities in neighbouring organisations. However, in 2017 they focussed on security issues, calling for the future economic and resource policies integrated with the security sphere. The need to create its own military group by the organisation shows that the member states were either not satisfied with the results of regional peacekeeping efforts or did not have enough military protection from the military groups. Therefore, the most benefit maximizing choice for the member states was to cooperate with the G5 Sahel established military group. On the one hand, the cooperation did provide leverage over the military projects aimed at terrorist groups. Especially the leverages had influence in case one of the LGA member states contributed military troops. Thus, through cooperation, the Liptako-Gourma Authority gained higher access to the military group, without increasing their expenses and directing budget at the LGA economic projects. On the other hand, the G5 Sahel group was heavily sponsored by the EU, therefore the process, plan and outcomes of the operations depended not only on the local militias, but also on how the projects were designed in the first place. French involvement greatly hindered the attempts of the LGA member states to gain control. Hence, the three countries, although had access to the joint military forces, still had less control than their own LGA aborted project would have had.
The further development of the Liptako-Gourma organisation is significantly limited to the security strategies and recalling the objectives of the 2017 revision. In 2023 the organisation adopted the «ALG Intervention Strategy» and «Project DOP», both of which set a number of objectives that must be achieved by the member states. Apart from the protection of economic interests and mineral resources, the intervention strategy calls for «strengthening security and stability» and promoting good governance. Security and stability goals target the maintenance of economic development, social order and control over territories. In contrast, governance and peacebuilding strategies focus on empowerment of local groups, thus increasing the resilience of the population and preventing the recruitment of younger generations to the terrorist groups (Liptako-Gourma Authority, 2023). The security intervention objectives were recalled due to a cascade of military coups in the LGA member states: 2021 – Mali, 2022 – Burkina Faso, 2023 – Niger. After the last military coup, the organisation, represented by new regimes, continued the focus on economic projects that simultaneously address economic and security spheres. Yet, as the Alliance of Sahel States (AoS) develops, the security sphere of the LGA policies becomes questionable, since the AoS takes on regional security obligations.
ECOWAS 
By the end of the 20th century, ECOWAS was taking on the functions of a security organisation with the major goals being protection of its member states from terrorist attacks, building up resilience and ensuring stability within them. ECOMOG became the main instrument of ECOWAS to maintain security issues through border control and military interventions in case of instability within the government. Still, ECOWAS was not a full-fledged security organisation, since its military operations were supported by the African Union and the United Nations. Therefore, although institutionally ECOWAS did adopt security policies, it still was unable to solely address the security issues in the region, thus requiring institutional restructuralisation to achieve its goals of dealing with security issues. 
The first major development of ECOWAS was in 2000, as the organisation adopted the document that establishes the subsidiary body «Intergovernmental Action Group Against Money Laundering» (GIABA). The group was initially created to establish control over ECOWAS member states' borders aiming money laundering activities that financially support terrorist groups in the region (GIABA, 2025). As the Action Group developed, it expanded to the control of all the flows across borders, focusing not only on money flows, but also on arms trade restrictions. Throughout the 2000s the Action Group acquired functional institutions, such as Secretariat (2004), Deputy (2005), and gained mandate for executing operations in 2006. Still, the operations were limited to prevention of money laundering activities. What is more, in 2006 ECOWAS created a new institution, intended for gathering intelligence of possible terrorist activities – Criminal Intelligence and Investigation Bureau (CIIB) (ECOWAS, Interpol, EU, 2010). The CIIB was allowed to access any information of the ECOWAS member states in order to not only track terrorist movement, but also to prevent possible military attacks or coup attempts. Thus, during the first decade of the 21st century ECOWAS focused on regulation of financial and arms flows across borders. The organisation did engage in the military operations in 2003 in Côte d’Ivoire (United Nations, 2003) and Liberia (United Nations, 2003), and in 2012 in Guinea-Bissau (ECOWAS, 2012). However, at the level of security policies, ECOWAS was making a number of attempts to establish regional stability without the need for interventions.
ECOWAS also restructured the Fund for Cooperation, Compensation and Development and transformed it to the ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development (EBID) in 1999-2000. The bank had no clear structure and was divided into separate entities that focused on providing financial support to the development projects in public and private spheres (EBID, 2020). However, already in 2006, the institutions were fused into EBID, and by 2007 the institution was fully operational. What is more, in 2007 the scope of EBID coverage increased, from sponsoring development projects only to assisting in their implementation and supervision (ibid.). Thus, although ECOWAS was concerned with the security problems in the region, the organisation did not neglect economic institutions and developed them to reach better economic output of its member states.
In terms of policies and approaches towards addressing terrorist issues, in 2001 ECOWAS adopted the «Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance», which encouraged member states of the organisation to ensure democratic rule and prohibition on acquisition of power through military takeover (ECOWAS, 2001). The document also demands for member states to address corruption, poverty and social inequalities, as the problems are believed to increase the likelihood of military coup, which ECOWAS attempts to evade (ibid.). Thus, in addition to the institutional body that controls the border flows, ECOWAS is also engaged in promoting security in the political sphere within its member states. Furthermore, in 2006 the organisation published the «Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and other Related Materials», which regulated and imposed constraints on the trade of light weaponry (ECOWAS, 2006). The small arms are the easiest accessible among armaments to the terrorist groups, especially in the context of their constant movement in the region. Therefore, the organisation firstly imposed control over the number of arms that is transferred through the member states’ borders (including their starting location and final destination). Then, ECOWAS limited the amount of manufactured light weapons by each member state. Thus, providing information on the movement and who possesses the weapons, decreasing the possibility of terrorist groups getting them (ibid.). The final security document before 2010s was the 2008 «Conflict Prevention Framework» (ECPF), which aimed at increasing coordination among the ECOWAS institutions to reach maximum efficiency in all spheres (ECOWAS, 2008). Security and terrorism issues are mentioned in the document, yet at the same level at the economic development and social policies. The framework also encourages member governments to increase dialogue with other member states, foster cultural exchange and boost the integration process. 
Hence, in the first 10 years of the 21st century, ECOWAS institutionally only acquired an action group that is responsible for establishing secure borders among its member states in order to prevent spreading terrorism. Still, the organisation on the one hand, addressed the terrorist issues through a number of policies, which either included or directly mentioned rising security problems. The policies aimed at prevention of terrorism attacks through addressing social problems, thus making an attempt by the member states to tackle terrorist threats. The policies of ECOWAS are implemented by the rule of consensus, therefore the member states agreed with each other on the necessity to contain spreading terrorism. The agreements to cooperate on security policies, even those that limit production of armaments, are highly rational for all the ECOWAS participants. Regional terrorism not only poses threats to the regime itself via military coups but also creates instabilities in both peripheral and central regions. Economic development in the period of political instability is neglected, since a country is concerned with its survival, rather than development. Thus, every member state was ready to accept limitations in order to decrease chances of terrorist attacks within the state or its neighbours. In case a neighbouring state faces terrorist issues, then the whole economic community would suffer in terms of hindered integration, increased expenses of military forces, and increased likelihood of a new terrorist attack on member states (e.g. Liberia and Côte D'Ivoire).
Consequently, in the 2010s ECOWAS continued pursuing the strategy of securitisation of its policies and engagement in military activities, yet targeting terrorist activities, rather than focusing on the overall security sphere. In 2010 GIABA established cooperation with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) (GIABA, 2025). FATF operates in the whole region of Africa, even going beyond to the Middle East (FATF, 2024). However, as the partnership was established, GIABA became the representative organisation of FATF in the Western African region. Therefore, GIABA was getting FATF practices, reviewed by the specialists, and was accountable to both ECOWAS and FATF. Thus, ECOWAS member states had the institution in their control, which was supported by another international organisation addressing the money laundering activities.
2013 was the changing year for the ECOWAS goals, strategies and projects. After the ECOWAS failed military mission in Malian civil war in 2012, commenced by terrorist groups, the organisation unilaterally agreed on the need to battle terrorist threats, otherwise the integration of ECOWAS would be threatened as member states face military coups and change their foreign policy. Thereby, the organisation proclaimed the «ECOWAS political Declaration and Common position Against Terrorism» along with the plan of implementation. The declaration not only defined terrorism and means to battle it but also set the rules that ECOWAS member states should follow in order to address terrorist threats (ECOWAS, 2013). The document states that regardless of the attempts to battle terrorist groups: by military interventions, through social and economic policies, on different levels from national to individual, still member states of the organisation face security problems caused by terrorist activities. Therefore, ECOWAS develops 3 pillars, based on which each member of the community should respond to terrorist groups: prevent, pursue, repair. The pillars focus on taking control over the reasons for the empowerment of terrorist groups (prevent), directly addressing activities initiated by terrorists (pursue) and fixing the damage that activities of the armed groups had done (repair). By following the strategies of each pillar, member states gained precise procedures, which should have increased the effectiveness of ECOWAS. Finally, the organisation encourages member states to work with not only ECOWAS institutions on terrorist matters, but national, international military groups and organisations that are able to provide support in peacekeeping attempts (ibid.). During the 2014 at the 44th session of ECOWAS Heads of States and Governments, the officials and state representatives supported the continuation of the anti-terrorism policies and use of economic institutions where possible to achieve a security environment (ECOWAS, 2014). 
Thus, in 2013 and 2014 ECOWAS directly proclaimed its intentions to deal with terrorist issues in the region and engaged all its institutions and partners in achieving its goals. Although the organisation did not have any institutional changes, ECOWAS still changed the goals of each and every subsidiary body of the organisation. The EBID gained the responsibility to support projects of buildings reconstruction that were damaged during the terrorist attacks. Intelligence (CIIB) and border control (GIABA) gained function to prevent any kind of arms trade or attack on vulnerable regions by terrorist groups. The investors and donors were encouraged to sponsor the projects that were related to the anti-terrorist activities. Hence, showing that in the first half of 2010s ECOWAS gained on the military security functions aimed directly at terrorist groups.  
From 2013 to the 2020s the organisation had no significant institutional changes, since it focused on implementation of security and economic policies. ECOWAS also decreased the degree of military interventions compared to the 1990s and 2000s. After the failed operation in Mali, ECOWAS initiated the UN supported deployment of ECOMOG in Gambia after the 2017 elections to ensure stability in the state (Ateku, 2020). The flaws on the ECOWAS counter-terrorism strategy were showing up, as the organisation could legitimize any intervention in its member state under the idea of political stability. Despite the criticism that may arouse around the use of ECOMOG (Omotosho & Senghore, 2018; Ateku, 2020), the Gambia intervention was successful, as the elections-chosen candidate came to power without major confrontation. In addition, due to the success of the operation, the mandate of ECOMOG in Gambia was extended as a support for the time the state recovers from the attempt of unconstitutional takeover. 
During the first 3 years of 2020s ECOWAS suspended 4 of its members due to military overthrows and consequent change of government and its foreign policy towards the integration project. In 2021 Mali was suspended due to a second military coup and an unconstitutional change of power. ECOWAS demanded for a military group to return the power and paused Malian participation in ECOWAS until the restoration of legitimate authorities. Mali also lost all the control over the ECOWAS institutions and was heavily sanctioned (ECOWAS, 2022). The major reasons for the military coup in Mali were corruption and inability to secure its borders from the terrorist attacks (Adetuyi, 2021:7). The Malian government was not only weakened by the terrorist presence, thus being unable to protect its borders, but also overthrown due to the uncontrollable flow of weapons across its borders. The spreading terrorist groups started acting as the force against which the ECOWAS member states’ governments were overthrown. In 2022 and 2023 Burkina Faso and Niger respectively faced the analogical to Mali faith. Both of the governments were overthrown and suspended from the organisation until they restored the constitutional order. Importantly, the reasons for military coups were the same as Mali – inability to address terrorist issues in the region (McCullough & Sandor, 2023). After the successful military coups, the three states established a military alliance (Alliance of Sahel States), whose primary goal is to fight terrorist groups. Thus, showing that apart from the problems that terrorism created for organisations, it was acting as a pushing force for counterinsurgencies claiming for the bad governance and the need to tackle security problems.
Hence, summing up the institutional evolution of ECOWAS, a number of conclusions can be made. Firstly, the organisation has significantly developed in the security sphere, although still having questionable success in its operations. ECOWAS took on the functions of the security organisation, despite the fact that its primary goal is economic development. Such changes are logical, since by the 2000s there were no major security actors that could address the issues of insecurity. Therefore, the appearance of institutions aiming at solving security problems is reasonable for the economic community. Furthermore, the organisation started to securiise its economic policies and use economic institutions to tackle the terrorism issues. 
Secondly, the ECOWAS member states decided for the suspension of Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger, although it was their decision, three states did not initiate withdrawal from their side. On the one hand, such action may seem irrational as by doing so the organisation demonstrated that the membership can be taken away from anyone. In such a context a rational member would reduce its contribution to the organisation, because there is risk of losing investments made into ECOWAS. On the other hand, suspensions were reasonable because if Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger were let to remain members, then such a situation would encourage military groups to attempt and take power from existing member states. Absence of sanctions towards the unstable states created an incentive for armed groups to attack other states and get power. What is more, the suspended three states were the participants of other military groups due to high difficulty of border control between them. Thus, suspension alleviated budgetary and institutional expenses, as the majority of the missions were aimed exactly at the Liptako-Gourma region. 
Thirdly, in the economic sphere ECOWAS continued implementing policies at the national and organisational levels. The organisation did not create institutions but rather developed the economic integration through bilateral and multilateral policies. The policies, meanwhile, after the 2013 declaration became highly securitised, therefore aiming to address both economic and security affairs. Hereby, as ECOWAS developed, created new institutions and established partnerships, its member states attempted to maximise the benefit of their choices. The institutions were used in various spheres, not only in the ones they were initially created. The partnerships and donors were encouraged to alleviate the likelihood of discontent within the organisation. The interventions were always legitimised through the policies that all of the member states agreed on, therefore protecting common interests of economic development through establishment of a secure environment.
2.2 Comparative analysis of institutional changes
The following part compares the institutional changes between 2 economic and 2 security organisations that were considered. All of the 4 studied organisations had implemented institutional changes to the security challenges. Still, the usage of security institutions and how goals of the organisations changed show how the integration project should be perceived. Thus, Lake Chad Basin Commission and Liptako-Gourma Authority are taken as economic organisations, since the initial and major goals were and remain to be economic development and cooperation on economic matters. In addition, the institutional development of the organisations in security had little impact on how the organisations position themselves. Both LCBC and LGA, although adopted military strategies and created institutions, still pursue the main goal of economic development with consequent policies without additional aims as means for achievement.
Meanwhile, G5 Sahel and ECOWAS are considered as security organisations. G5 Sahel initially was created exclusively to tackle terrorist threats in the Sahel region through various means, and only later took on additional functions. In contrast, ECOWAS provides difficulties in its perception of an organisation of a certain type. On the one hand, it is an economic organisation: it positions itself as such, the Revised Treaty, which is in power, also claims that organisation desires economic integration. However, throughout the 21st century, ECOWAS created a number of security institutions and adopted policies that were initially aiming at battling terrorism and then establishing a secure environment in the region. Furthermore, ECOWAS has initiated a number of military interventions in its member states with the goal of peacekeeping, showing the dual nature of the organisation. Okon & Ojakorotu (2022) argue that the organisation is a «pluralistic security community», implying that the institutions, protocols and agreements resemble the conventional security institution. Simultaneously, ECOWAS still possesses bodies and policies that target socio-economic development, yet to a lower degree than in the 20th century (Okon & Ojakorotu, 2022). Adams (2019) and Gandois (2009) also argue that ECOWAS is a security organisation but provide different reasoning. Adams (2019) argues that ECOWAS became a security organisation due to the spread of light weapons, high migration and illicit drug use, all of which are caused by actions of terrorist groups. Gandois (2009), on the contrary, argues that the main reason for ECOWAS shifting the security matters is due to regional hegemon (Nigeria), which seeks to protect its borders by using weaker states in its favour. Thereby, ECOWAS is already institutionally and based on its actions is perceived as the security organisation, yet not a full-fledged one. 
To compare the institutional development of the organisations, the tables containing major policies are introduced with the year of adoption, official reasons for creation of the policy and media coverage on the institution/policy and context, when it was implemented. Thus, official reasons and media coverage are present to compare the differences between the discourse presented by the official claims of an organisation and how it is portrayed by media (including other organisations, news agencies, and analysis in academic literature), including the context in which the objects were changing. The media coverage would also provide higher insights on the reasoning for creation, since official documents may omit actual reasons for changes. Finally, media coverage provides the analysis of possible triggers that may have caused changes, since they may not be covered by the official documents of the organisation.
Economic organisations
Based on the information presented in Table №1, the Lake Chad Basin Commission was developing as an economic organisation until the attacks of Boko Haram. Due to the activities and later dissemination of the terrorist group the organisation shifted its policies to address security issues, therefore initially recalling the mandate of the Joint Task Force and later developing it with the supplementary policies to increase the efficiency of the joint military group. 

Table 1. Reasoning for institutional changes of Lake Chad Basin Commission

The LCBC regardless of the military changes in its institutions still remain an economic organisation. Firstly, the major objective of the LCBC remains to be environmental regulations and common economic prosperity. The organisation continues to publish reports on the Lake Chad basin water resources and results of the environmental programs implemented by the LCBC. What is more, the security issues are only one of the third aims of the organisation on the same level as water resource management and preservation of biodiversity. Thus, Daoust and Selby (2022) call the LCBC a «climate security community» – the organisation that focuses on addressing climate change and simultaneously provide security to ensure protection of and access to water resources. 
Secondly, the LCBC did not initially have a mandate over the MNJTF but was assigned to by the African Union (MNJTF, 2020), since the LCBC member states were the main contributors of the joint military forces. The Lake Chad basin Commission had no institutional capacity to create and maintain the military institution among environmental policies. Therefore, currently the joint task force is presented separately from the LCBC, although the organisation has control over the military group. Finally, the environmental programs are implemented throughout the long term and do not require creation of new institutions, whereas military security threats require instant response, joint consensual actions and funding, all of which does necessarily demand incorporation of new institutions. Therefore, implying that the security stability in the region did not become the sole and major goal of the organisation to reach.
The Liptako-Gourma Authority, in contrast, presents less security changes, although still does not avoid them as is seen from Table №2 The organisation was implementing economic policies and expanded its institutional capabilities in order to increase efficiency. However, as the terrorist groups became active in the beginning of 2010s, the organisation was required to respond to the incoming security issues. Important to say, that Mali was also suffering from the civil war, where one of the causes was terrorist activities and spread insecurity in the region. Thus, the organisation in the 2011 official declaration tackled economic development in the context of addressing terrorist threats. 
However, the LGA did not take on the security functions. The security institutions of the organisation are linked to the economic cooperation and promotion of development among its member states. The revised treaty, although encouraging cooperation in the security sphere, still does not enforce it upon LGA members. Analogical situation can be traced in 2023, as security institutions were established not to carry mutual military operations, but to provide mutual assistance and mechanisms in non-military spheres. Thus, LGA focused on strengthening civilian protection and providing approaches to resolve conflicts with each other, rather than coordinate military forces. The joint military strikes were rather delegated to a newly established organisation (Alliance of Sahel States) between the LGA members, thus separating scope of responsibility of each organisation and avoiding institutional overflow of each of them.  The AoS provides enough institutions for further cooperation among Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso to avoid changing the LGA goals and strategies.

Table 2. Reasoning for institutional changes of Liptako-Gourma Authority

Hence, comparing the outcomes of LCBC and LGA institutional evolution, a number of conclusions can be made. Firstly, the LCBC in its structure took on the responsibility of a semi-security organisation, simultaneously addressing security issues in the region and keeping military operations afar from the environmental regulations. In contrast, the LGA managed to keep its goals and approach towards achievement, although implementing security policies, yet imposing limits on their influence. This can be explained by the presence of and participation in military institutions/organisations that allowed the former to focus on resource management, rather than security cooperation. The reason for increased security cooperation in both organisations is the same – dissemination of Boko Haram terrorist activities. However, while the member states of LGA were participants of G5 Sahel, thus not requiring adoption of security measures within the LGA integration framework, the LCBC did not have such an opportunity. Thereby, the LCBC was forced to recall and later head the joint military response, as no other major security institution could not provide an efficient response. 
In terms of rationality of decisions, in case of LGA membership, the most rational approach towards institutions was to continue pursuing the original non-security integration process, since military problems were addressed by G5 Sahel and ECOMOG operations. In the case of the LCBC membership, the rationality of engagement in military affairs is questionable. On the one hand, the regional situation and action of the terrorist group required the organisation to provide a firm response. If control is absent, then no project could be finished or even managed. On the other hand, the LCBC member states – all already participated in the MNJTF, which acted separate from the LCBC. The integration of military operations to the environmental institution only increased the complexity of institutional structure and did not increase effectiveness of military operations. What is more, two of the LCBC member states (Niger, Nigeria) also participate in ECOMOG military operations, which covers the issue of insecurity at their borders. Therefore, making the mandate of MNJTF closer to a coordination platform, rather than provision of joint military response.
Secondly, regardless of the degree to which security policies were implemented in the organisations, both organisations-maintained dedication to their initial goals. Although the LCBC did adopt security features, it still focuses on achieving environmental stability through joint efforts. The MNJTF was created and headed as a necessity, rather than a will of the LCBC member states (all of which still agreed to it). The LGA continues to increase economic integration among three member states, albeit initially being a mission to manage natural resources. The LGA mandate also currently substitutes the benefits gained from the ECOWAS integration project, as LGA members were suspended.
Finally, security issues posed by terrorist activities acted as a pushing power for the organisations to enhance their development. After the renewed attacks of Boko Haram, both of the organisations deepened their integration not only in the security sphere. LGA revised its treaty and expanded economic integration, whereas the LCBC started adopting more policies on empowerment of the civil population. The changes were initiated in the same time frames in both organisations, since both of them were responding to the actions of Boko Haram. The major difference still remains in the approach, methods and instruments used to address the issue. Thus, demonstrating that the dissemination of terrorist activities, especially carried out by Boko Haram, were a trigger that forced organisations to enhance the degree of integration. The LGA increased the number of their economic policies, expanded the scope of its responsibility, and adjusted economic policies to meet security issues. The LCBC, on the other hand, simultaneously engaged in regional peacekeeping through military means and implemented environmental projects, therefore increasing integration in both economic and security spheres. 
Security organisations
G5 Sahel as a security organisation implemented the least number of significant institutional changes, as can be seen in Table №3. The changes within the organisation were majorly related to the establishment of agreements with other regional institutions and search for donors that could provide funds for further military operations. The major change within the G5 Sahel was in 2017, when it shifted its focus from addressing domestic issues of the countries, to the direct military engagement with the armed groups in the region. 

Table 3. Reasoning for institutional changes of G5 Sahel

On the one hand, the joint military participation of G5 Sahel member states would allow them to exchange information, adopt new practices and jointly tackle incoming threats from terrorist groups. On the other hand, G5 Sahel at its first stages of development already had increasing influence over the domestic politics of the West African states. What is more, the failures of policies and further operations under the French leadership raised anti-French sentiments within African countries. Therefore, the G5 Sahel decision to focus exclusively on military policies was highly irrational in the long-run, considering the questionable success of policy-building within the member states. 
The later withdrawal of the majority of G5 Sahel member states, proved for the organisation to be ineffective. Member states were obliged to spend their budget for security affairs, however, since the armies were not controlled by a single state, the “joint” part of the operations disappeared. Therefore, the organisation not only failed to provide improvement of governance and policies in tackling terrorist influence, but also did not coordinate effectively military groups of its member states. Furthermore, the West African states apart from participation in other military projects (MNJTF, ECONOMOG) had to contribute their forces, making themselves vulnerable to the attacks. The standing army was separated between different organisations and was significantly reduced in terms of control by the government. Hence, considering all the facts, inferring that the most rational approach for the members of the integration project would be to withdraw from the organisation.
Meanwhile, ECOWAS had different dynamics in its institutional change (Table №4). Initially, the organisation was operating in the economic and security affairs of its member states. Thereby, the consequent policies were focused on promotion of economic integration. Prior to 2013, ECOWAS was adopting and developing institutions that would indirectly tackle terrorist issues. Thus, the development of GIABA and its partnership with FATF as well as establishment of CIIB with INTERPOL can be seen. The economic organisation wanted to control and contain the spreading terrorist activities, rather than directly address the issue. The approach is reasonable, since economic integration was put on the first place.

Table 4. Reasoning for institutional changes of ECOWAS

Nonetheless, ECOWAS did commence interventions into its member states. Yet, the interventions were limited, without the mandate to battle armed groups, but rather to establish stability within a country and then withdraw troops. Although, in case of ECOWAS the interventions were not successful, still the organisation was not greatly engaged in direct confrontation with terrorist groups. As a result, after the resurgence of terrorist groups in the regions, especially Boko Haram in northern Nigeria, ECOWAS did take on the role of a security organisation. In 2013 as the organisation made a declaration against terrorism, it proclaimed that it would directly battle any terrorist threats in the space of the economic community. Thus, ECOWAS changed its major goal to battle terrorist groups in Sahel in order to achieve economic integration, since with the instability within the organisation’s member states, the integration is highly limited. 
Consequently, after the declaration against terrorist groups, the organisation initiated intervention in Mali in 2013, aiming to restore the Malian government and fight armed groups where possible. Still the intervention was not successful, leading to the changes in mandate. Further, in 2017 the organisation deployed troops in Gambia after elections and mass protests. The success is arguable, however, the intervention was deemed to be unnecessary, since the ECOWAS increasing engagement in internal affairs of its member states became to be criticised (Ateku, 2020). In the 2020s as Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger faced military coups, ECOWAS acquired a mandate to lead intervention to restore the constitutional order, which eventually did not happen. Thus, on the one hand, through interventions the organisation was gaining the role of regional peacekeeper as the anti-terrorist sentiments within its member states were rising. On the other hand, the organisation, although demonstrating preparedness to engage in any conflict within its area, still did not engage in the case of Niger. Therefore, inferring that the organisation in the 2010s gained a role of a security actor and as it was conducting unsuccessful operations ECOWAS did not engage in military activities, although keeping the anti- terrorist and money laundering institutions.
Comparing the evolution of considered security organisations, both have similarities and differences in their development. Firstly, in terms of similar features, both organisations initially attempted to address terrorist activities indirectly via non-military means. Thus, both organisations have established various agreements and institutions that would impede dissemination of terrorist groups. The approach was to reduce the terrorists’ capabilities and empower the civilian population. Secondly, the organisations in the same manner shifted the policies initially to the direct military means, and finally to the end of security cooperation. Both integration projects initially after a period of time, during which security issues were tackled indirectly, shifted to direct military confrontation with the terrorist groups. Both organisations had questionable success in addressing terrorist issues through military means, therefore demonstrating the dissolution or lack of usage of such institutions. 
In terms of differences, the organisations majorly had different approaches to how the issue should be addressed. Although both organisations had similar patterns in policies, still there were differences in the degree of intervention. G5 Sahel approached terrorist threats through direct engagement in its member states’ territories, simultaneously attempting to adjust civil policies. ECOWAS avoided direct military confrontations, but rather focused on peacebuilding and ensuring stability in the region. In addition, ECOWAS imposed higher restrictions based on agreements made in the 2000s, therefore forcing states to maintain democratic rule and attempting to prevent unconstitutional changes. However, the organisation still provided a higher degree of freedom to its participants than the G5 Sahel did, thus providing one of the reasons for the dissolution of the latter.
Chapter 3. Interpretation of results
3.1 Primary conclusions
Summing up the evolution features of economic and security organisations, following conclusions can be made. Firstly, and most importantly, all the organisations regardless of their type were heavily shaped by the rising insecurity posed by terrorist groups in the region. Both types of the organisations adopted security measures and adjusted their initial policies to meet new realities of the region. However, the degree of engagement in security institutions differ based on the type of organisation. Thus, LCBC and LGA albeit introduced the security institutions and cooperation agreements, yet did not enforce them as was done by ECOWAS or G5 Sahel. The security integration in economic organisations remained at scope of protecting vulnerable communities, rather than directly engaging in conflicts with terrorist groups. 
Secondly, security approaches performed by the economic organisations remained intact due to indirect fight against terrorism. Economic organisations adjusted their policies to also include security aspects. Cooperations with other institutions also aimed at sharing intelligence and providing mutual assistance, thus avoiding military clashes. In contrast, security organisations shifted from the policy-based approach to the direct confrontation, requiring increasing funds and personnel. As a result, security organisations had questionable success through military approach and became either unused (e.g. ECOMOG) or even under threat of complete dissolution (e.g. G5 Sahel).  
Thirdly, security organisations demonstrate a tendency of changing the membership status of its member states. After 20the military coups in the 2020s in Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger, ECOWAS suspended their membership until they adhere to the rule of the organisation, to be exact – return the constitutional order. The G5 Sahel, although did not suspend any members, still faced reduction in membership due to voluntary exit of its member states. Both organisations had increasing limitations and requirements posed on the member states. The participants also had to give up their sovereignty and security to the institution, therefore becoming vulnerable without guarantee that the state would be protected. The economic organisations, in contrast, since they were interested in shared economic policies and had low levels of security integration, did not have strict obstacles to the membership. Therefore, LGA and LCBC did not lose any of their member states although the participants with the G5 Sahel and ECOWAS are nearly the same.  
Finally, the changes within the organisations of all types were pushed by the terrorist activities in the region. The crises sponsored or caused by terrorist groups encourages organisations to provide responses at institutional level, since the old practices did not prevent instability. Consequently, as terrorist groups were attacking the countries in the region, the organisations were changing their approaches and increasing security cooperation. Thus, the first major change within the integration projects was in 2011 – 2013, and second was in 2017 – 2020 when Boko Haram group was disturbing the order at the borders in northern Nigeria and at Liptako-Gourma region. All the organisations, regardless of their type, provided a response in the face of enhanced security cooperation, yet with different methods and degree of integration in the military sphere, both of which depend on the organisation type.
In terms of liberal intergovernmentalism framework, the member states of the organisations are the main actors that decide for the policies and actions of the integration projects. Therefore, the institutional changes made by organisations should represent the interests of countries, since all the actors are assumed to be rational decision-makers. Consequently, the members of economic organisations were interested in adopting common policies exclusively on economic matters. The deepened integration on security affairs was not in the interest of any of the countries, since the region already had sufficient security institutions (G5 Sahel, ECOMOG, African Union, MNJTF). Hence, in order not to increase budget spendings and divert the initial goal of the cooperation to the security matters, the members of economic organisations implemented security elements in their policies. The MNJTF by the LCBC acted as a coordination platform that would empower the civilian population and share intelligence and practices, rather than engage in conflicts.
Meanwhile, the participants of the security organisations were shifting instruments from policy-based to military confrontation. The approach is questionable but can be seen as rational. On the one hand, military confrontations demand higher budget and personnel spendings. Therefore, the participants will have to give more sovereignty to achieve the goals set unanimously. What is more, military engagement does not guarantee that the problem will be solved, thus increasing the chances for failure. On the other hand, direct confrontation provides member states an opportunity to directly strike the vulnerable points of terrorist groups and therefore faster tackle the issue. With the increased budget and larger personnel, member states get higher chances of eradicating the common problem, rather than indirectly addressing it. 
Thus, for the security organisations after the policy-based approach and lack of results, the most viable option was to shift towards direct confrontation with the terrorist groups. Considering that member states already adopted policies, create institutions and participate in other regional organisations with similar approaches, the direct clash with terrorist groups would provide better results and higher chances of eliminating common threats. What is more, members of security organisations benefited from both economic and security reforms. Member states of G5 Sahel and ECOWAS simultaneously with the peacekeeping and war of terror were engaging in deepened economic integration, which provided resources and support to the government to increase spendings and tackle terrorist threats directly. 
Hence, throughout the 21st century, the evolution of international organisations and their response to the increasing instability in the region is explained by the rational decision making representing the interests of their member states. Terrorist threats are a common problem of the region; therefore it is in the national interests of all the countries to address the common problem. Thereby, states agreed on establishment of new bodies and institutions within the security organisations as the attempt to tackle common issues and reduce costs. Countries also made changes in the economic organisations to meet security issues and common policies within the organisations. Thus, the policies of economic and security organisations at the first stages were similar, despite lack of agreements between them. Consequently, all the organisations increased the cooperation in security affairs, however members of economic integration projects securitised policies, while security organisations grew into military cooperation institutions.
3.2 Discussion
Overview of current development of the organisations
Currently the international organisations still face a number of security issues in the region, which incorporate not only terrorist threats, but also local conflicts. Consequently, the overall approach of the organisations regardless of their type is to provide stability at least in their member states. The G5 Sahel recently in 2022 and 2023 faced mass withdrawal as it lost 3 member states. However, despite the organisation membership decreasing to only 2 members, the operations are still carried out and funding is provided by the European Union. Thereby, the regional security organisation became a platform for support of two African states in their attempts to address insecurities at their borders. The members are also little related to each other due to their geographic position and nearly absence of interaction, apart from participation in G5 Sahel. Thus, the organisation no longer acts as the unifying force and has low capabilities of military operations to carry out. 
ECOWAS nearly disappeared in the region as a security actor. The intervention into Niger was not initiated as was promised by the heads of member states. Recent developments in the region, especially the creation of the Alliance of Sahel States (AoS), allows ECOWAS to focus on economic cooperation, rather than security issues. The organisation is currently deepening its integration efforts in agriculture and investment. ECOWAS also still adopts policies on the common fight against terrorist threats through adjustment of policies at the level of organisation and increasing education levels at the national level of each member state. What is more, since the organisation faced mass withdrawal and creation of another integration project by the left states, ECOWAS engages in the negotiations with the AoS members and terms of establishing future relations with them. Thereby, by April 2025 ECOWAS follows the principles of economic organisation, yet having the developing remnants of security instruments still being imposed on its member states as necessary to follow.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission and Liptako-Gourma Authority had little institutional changes since both economic organisations were affected less than the security organisations. Both of the organisations continue to operate with the initial goal of increasing economic and environmental integration. Neither of the organisations has membership issues, although Niger as the participant of both faced military coup and was argued to be suspended due to Nigeria’s pressure in ECOWAS (being also a member of the LCBC). Nonetheless, even with contradictions between member states, the organisation manages to address security threats through the CIMIC approach, thus focusing on protection of vulnerable societies located at the borders. The LGA, in contrast, expanded its functions to the integration in energy, agriculture, and water management sectors. The LGA became the economic integration project, having no necessity for developing and security measures, since they are covered by the AoS, having the same membership. Consequently, both economic organisations not only maintained their statuses and workflow without interruptions, but also expanded scope of responsibilities, thus demonstrating deepening of the integration in the region.
Limitations
The research faced a number of limitations, the majority of which were tied to the acquisition of data. Firstly, and most importantly, among the goals the research had to compare the economic and security organisations, each of which had different amounts of available information. Thus, ECOWAS and Lake Chad Basin Commission had most of the information available for research. G5 Sahel, although had limited access to information due to absence of official website and media coverage, still was accessible through scientific works and their records. The most problematic organisation to find information was the Liptako-Gourma Authority. Little scientific papers are dedicated to the development and analysis of actions of the LGA, therefore limiting the degree of analysis for the organisation. 
Secondly, the research did not pay significant consideration to the influence of Alliance of Sahel States due to lack of scientific research, unclear institutional structure, distribution of powers and officially proclaimed policies provided by the organisation. The AoS as a security organisation has increasing influence on the further actions and development of actors – organisations and separate member states. As discussed above, the organisation may incentivise neighbouring organisations to reduce their security policies, due to the presence of actor that directly tackle the problem. In addition, the presence of military alliance near the ECOWAS member states, majority of which have negative relations with AoS members, can push ECOWAS either for adoption of pro-peaceful policies or to increase ECOWAS security in order to prevent military coups.
Finally, the research pays little importance to the influence of international and non-regional actors. The research considers the actors only if the international actors had direct influence on the development of the organisation. For instance, the participation of the EU and France are considered in the case of the G5 Sahel. However, apart from sponsor-beneficiary relations, other non-regional actors are neglected, including the participation of the US and countries of the Middle East that supported the development of the organisation.
Future implications
The research paper and presented results can be used in both practical approach and theoretical studies. The results address the tendencies of development of the international organisations, therefore not only synthesising information, but also providing analysis on influence of terrorist activities on the actions of member states and changes in their national interests.
Practically, the research provides the tendency of how different types of the organisations changed. The security and economic organisations provided a similar pattern of response and had similar drawbacks of implemented policies. Thus, the further policy making within a certain type of the organisation can be adjusted based on the results of the research. In particular, the research provides successful and failed cases of policy changes. Consequently, for security organisations during addressing terrorist threats in Sahel region, even if direct military policies are adopted, the rational approach would constitute maintenance of policy-based instruments in tackling terrorist threats. Economic organisations are demonstrated as successful examples, therefore providing possible policies and instruments for economic integration projects to follow. The region is still full of insecurity and terrorist activities, making the adoption to security challenges necessary, which can be achieved with less expenses based on already successful existing experience from the LCBC and LGA.  
In the theoretical field, the research provides insights on the changes within the organisation for further examination. Organisations were shown to implement certain policy changes, thus focusing on the period studying the possible reasons and behaviour patterns of single member states that might have had influence. What is more, the focus on single member states can be examined further, therefore revealing how the behaviour of a country was shaped, and whether it was influenced by any international or regional actors. Finally, the results of the research can foster the studies of smaller regional organisations and their influence not only on neighbouring countries, but also on the policies of non-regional actors interested in their development. Thus, for instance, the LGA should have higher significance in further research due to its evolution from mission to the economic organisation that supports the development of AoS, therefore increasing the likelihood of appearance of a strong security actor in the region.  

Conclusion
The research tackled the influence of terrorism on the institutional changes made by the regional organisations in Sahel. The study draws several conclusions based on the process tracing and historical and comparative analyses. First, the organisations since the history of creation were tackling security concerns either through adjustment of economic policies to meet the nature of security issues or through establishment of institutions to address the issue. Important to note that throughout the 20th century economic organisations had little development in the security sphere in comparison to the security ones, although policies were still present. The major institutional security changes were adopted in the 21st century in the beginning of 2010s due to increasing activity of Boko haram in the region. Secondly, the research conducted comparative analysis to uncover the differences in the response between economic and security organisations. Thus, the study concludes that the influence of terrorist activities on the international organisations in Sahel regions has both similar and different effects depending on the type of the organisation. 
Among the similar features, the organisations demonstrated a similar pattern of behaviour during the resurgence of terrorist activities and the initial approach by which the organisations responded. Firstly, all the organisations’ primary responses to the terrorist issues were dedicated to the implementation of security policies that address the main causes of disseminating terrorism. Both economic and security organisations at the first steps initiated focused on the policy-based approach, through which main issues were addressed by adjustments to the governments or introduction of social and economic policies. Secondly, the institutional development of the organisations was facilitated by the dissemination of terrorist activities, therefore demonstrating the creation of security institutions at the same time period in all organisations. Thus, implying that terrorist activities forced regional organisations to deepen their integration process regardless of the initial goals. Thirdly, the institutional changes within any type of organisation is the representation of the national interests of organisation’s member states. The increased cooperation in the security sphere was the common desire to address the terrorist activities and alleviate their influence on national security, simultaneously reducing costs through cooperative efforts and exchange of information among members. In the case of ECOWAS, suspension of three member states was also in the security (thus national) interests of the participants, since the participation of Mali, Burkina Faso or Niger would increase the likelihood of military coups attempts. 
Nevertheless, economic and security organisations did provide a number of differences in institutional response, degree of engagement in security matters, and stability of adopted policies. First of all, the organisations demonstrated a distinct approach towards the implementation of their strategies. Although the initial policies for both types were similar, in their further developments the economic organisations continue to pursue initial goals of enhancing and expanding joint economic activities and cooperation. The LCBC and LGA remain dedicated to their goals by positioning economic integration over ongoing security issues in the region. Both organisations adopted security institutions, still the newly established bodies are limited in their functions and responsibilities. Security organisations, in contrast, shifted from an initial policy-based approach to addressing the terrorist threats through military engagement. Thus, the security organisations by the mid-2010s had functions of interventions to the member states in order to restore stability and combat active armed groups. Secondly, both types of the organisations provided security institutions, however the degree of implementation was different. As was mentioned above the economic organisations initiated but still limited their security initiatives in order to avoid increasing spendings and retracting of the organisation to military security issues. Tackling terrorist activities for LGA and the LCBC remained indirect. Whereas, the security organisations voluntarily enforced the security arrangements, therefore demanding higher financing. ECOWAS and G5 Sahel established partnerships and attracted donors to support their regional military operations. 
Thirdly, the stability of the international organisations also differs based on the type of organisations. Thus, economic organisations had no crises of membership or policy implementation, since they did not require significant funding, were independent of the success of operations, and had little demands on the political structure of their member states. Consequently, regardless of the military coups or unconstitutional changes within the governments, economic organisations did not promote the suspension or withdrawal of their member states. In contrast, the security organisations imposed a number of political constraints on the participants, implying that in case of unregulated governmental change, the state would be sanctioned. In addition, the security integration projects demanded high military and financial donorship, therefore weakening the participating countries. Hence, in the case of G5 Sahel the members withdrew to return political independence and military capabilities, whereas ECOWAS suspended three of its member states due to political changes and consequent security issues that they posed. The rationality of the suspension of the member states by ECOWAS is discussed throughout the research, however the major conclusions would suggest avoiding consequent actions, since suspension decreases the likelihood of further cooperation, especially with the newly established Alliance of Sahel States, being a security organisation. 
The institutional evolution of the international organisations in Sahel, causes and consequences of the implemented changes is significant for the further research and decision on the policymaking. The research infers that the organisations demonstrate higher stability and resilience to the terrorist activities in case the integration and policymaking is centred around introduction of security measures in social and economic spheres. What is more, the avoidance of direct confrontation with terrorist groups and focus on enhancing stability of member states, rather than elimination of terrorist groups is also beneficial for the integration projects in the region due to lower financial requirements. In terms of further research, studies can be dedicated to the influence of external actors on the decision-making process by the member states, thus providing insights on the rationale behind the decisions made by national interests or by interests of other actors. The influence of non-state actors, such as NGO or financial organisations also can be addressed since they operate under the frameworks of the international organisations yet have influence on the empowerment of civil society. In addition, the further research can place higher significance to the smaller organisations due to their increasing influence on regional dynamics and decisions made by the neighbouring integration projects.
Reference list
Primary Data
African Union. (2015, February 10). Experts Meeting on the elaboration of operational documents for the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) of the Member States of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin against the Boko Haram terrorist group. African Union. https://www.peaceau.org/en/article/experts-meeting-on-the-elaboration-of-operational-documents-for-the-multinational-joint-task-force-mnjtf-of-the-member-states-of-the-lake-chad-basin-commission-and-benin-against-the-boko-haram-terrorist-group
African Union. (2019). LCBC Regional Stabilisation Strategy. African Union.
African Union (1999). OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism. African Union.
African Union (2021). Briefing on the Implementation of the Stabilization Strategy for the Lake Chad Basin. AmaniAfrica. https://amaniafrica-et.org/briefing-on-the-implementation-of-the-stabilization-strategy-for-the-lake-chad-basin/?print=print
Alliance Sahel. (2020, October 23). The G5 Sahel: Enhanced cooperation for security and development. Alliance Sahel.
EBID. (2020). About Us: EBID in Brief. BIDC-EBID. https://www.bidc-ebid.org/en/home/aboutus/
EBID. (2020). Background. EBID. https://www.bidc-ebid.org/en/home/aboutus/
ECOWAS, Interpol, EU. (2010). WAPIS Programme West African Police Information System. Interpol. https://www.interpol.int/content/download/12480/file/WAPIS_BROCHURE_EN_002_LR.pdf
ECOWAS. (2001, December). Protocol A/SP1/12/01 on Democracy and Good Governance Supplementary to the Protocol relating to the Mechanism For Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security. Electoral Institute of Sustainable Democracy in Africa.  https://www.eisa.org/pdf/ecowas2001protocol.pdf
ECOWAS. (2006, June 14). ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and other Related Materials. Stockholm International Peace Research Institutte. https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/research/disarmament/dualuse/pdf-archive-att/pdfs/ecowas-convention-on-small-arms-and-light-weapons-their-ammunition-and-other-related-materials.pdf
ECOWAS. (2008, January 16). The ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework. African Union. https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/39184-doc-140._the_ecowas_conflict_prevention_framework.pdf
ECOWAS. (2012, November 7). ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau to be formalized. Reliefweb. https://reliefweb.int/report/guinea-bissau/ecowas-mission-guinea-bissau-be-formalized-0
ECOWAS. (2013). ECOWAS political declaration and common position against terrorism. ECOWAS. https://ecowas.int/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/POLITICAL-DECLARATION-ENG..pdf
ECOWAS. (2022, March 25). Extraordinary Summit of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government on the Situation in Mali, Guinea, Burkina Faso. ECOWAS. https://ecowas.int/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Eng-Final-Communiqué-Extra-Summit-25-mars-à-23h.pdf
ECOWAS. (2022 January, 10). Final Communiqué: 4th Extraordinary Summit of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government on the Political Situation in Mali. Reliefweb. https://reliefweb.int/report/mali/final-communique-4th-extraordinary-summit-ecowas-authority-heads-state-and-government
ECOWAS. (2025). ECOWAS Bank of Investment and Development (EBID). ECOWAS. https://www.ecowas.int/institutions/ecowas-bank-for-investment-and-development-ebid/
ECOWAS. (2025). The Inter-Governmental Action Group against Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing in West Africa (GIABA). ECOWAS. https://www.ecowas.int/institutions/the-inter-governmental-action-group-against-money-laundering-and-terrorism-financing-in-africa-giaba/
ECOWAS (2013, February 28). ECOWAS Counter-Terrorism Strategy. ECOWAS. ECOWAS Counter-Terrorism Strategy | Economic Community of West African States(ECOWAS)
ECOWAS (2013). Ecowas counter-terrorism strategy implementation plan. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. https://sherloc.unodc.org/cld/uploads/res//treaties/strategies/international_bodies/inb0004s_html/ECOWAS_Counter-Terrorism_Strategy.pdf
ECOWAS (2014, March 29). Forty-Fourth Ordinary Session of Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government. Amani Africa. https://amaniafrica-et.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/44th-ECOWAS-Summit-Yamoussoukro-28-29-March-20141.pdf
ECOWAS Revised Treaty (1993). (1993, July 24). Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). https://ecowas.int/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Revised-treaty-1.pdf
European Council on Foreign Relations. (2018). Mapping African regional cooperation: G5 Sahel. ECFR. https://ecfr.eu/special/african-cooperation/g5-sahel/
European Council on Foreign Relations (2025). Mapping African Regional Cooperation: Liptako-Gourma Authority. European Council on Foreign Relations. https://ecfr.eu/special/african-cooperation/liptako-gourma-authority/
FATF. (2010, October). Improving Global AML/CFT Compliance: update on-going process - October 2010. FATF. https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/High-risk-and-other-monitored-jurisdictions/Improvingglobalamlcftcomplianceupdateon-goingprocess-october2010.html
FATF. (2013, October). FATF Report: TErrorist Financing in West Africa. FATF. https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-gafi/reports/TF-in-West-Africa.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
FATF. (2024). Inter Governmental Action Group against Money Laundering in West Africa (GIABA). FATF-GAFI. https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/countries/global-network/inter-governmental-action-group-against-money-laundering-in-west.html
G5 Sahel, Permanent Secretariat (2018, October). PRIORITY INVESTMENT PROGRAM (PIP/G5 Sahel) First Phase 2019-2021. Railways Africa.
G5 Sahel (2014). Convention Portant Creation Du G5 Sahel. Internet Archive, G5 Sahel. https://web.archive.org/web/20170602170931/http://www.g5sahel.org/images/convention.pdf
G5 Sahel Defence College (2025). Missions. G5 Sahel Defence College. https://cdg5s.org/en/en/node/1185
GIABA. (2024). GIABA 2023 Annual Report. GIABA. https://www.giaba.org/annualreports/index.html
GIABA. (2025). About GIABA. GIABA. https://www.giaba.org/about-giaba/index.html
GIABA. (2025). Revised Statutes of the Inter-Governmental Action Group Against Money Laundering in West Africa (GIABA). GIABA. https://www.giaba.org/about-giaba/647__statutes.html
Implementation Completion and Result Report. (2009). World Bank.
Interpol (2020). G5 Sahel. Interpol. https://www.interpol.int/es/Delitos/Terrorismo/Proyectos-de-lucha-contra-el-terrorismo/G5-Sahel
Lake Chad Basin Commission. (2008, December 17). High-level Conference on water for agriculture and energy in Africa: The challenges of climate change. Openknowledge.
Lake Chad Basin Commission. (2018). PILLAR PAPER for Screening, Prosecution, Rehabilitation and Reintegration. African Union
Lake Chad Basin Commission (1964). Convention and statutes relating to the development of the Chad basin. Food and Agriculture organisation of the United Nations.
Lake Chad Basin Commission (2000). Integrated River Basin Management: Challenges of the Lake Chad Basin. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations.
LCBC (2011, April 8). Water Charter of the Lake Chad Basin – English version. Food and Agriculture organisation of the United Nations. https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/mul203691.pdf
LCBC (2018, August). Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery & Resilience of the Boko Haram Affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region. African Union.
LCBC (2018). Regional Strategy for Stabilisation, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko-Haram affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region. LCBC.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2000, December 16). Textes Législatifs Révisés De L'Autorité Du Liptako-Gourma. Centre de Documentation et des Archives.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2001, August 27). Accord De Siège Révisé Entre L'Autorité De Développement Intégré de la Région du Liptako-Gourma et le gouvernement du Burkina Faso. Liptako-Gourma.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2001, March 20). Convention Révisée Portant Statuts De L'Autorité De Développement Intégré de la Région du Liptako-Gourma. Centre de Documentation et des Archives.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2001, March 20). Règlement Intérieur Révisé de la Direction Générale de L'Autorité de Développement Intégré de la Région du Liptako-Gourma. Centre de Documentation et des Archives.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2017, January 24) Traite Revise De L'Autorité de Développement Intégré des Etats du Liptako-Gourma (ALG). Liptako-Gourma.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2018, July 4). Signing of a cooperation agreement between the ALG and the G5 Sahel. Liptako-Gourma.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2023, September). Résumé du projet DOP. Liptako-Gourma.
Liptako-Gourma Authority. (2023, September). Résumé Stratégie d’Intervention de l’ALG. Liptako-Gourma.
Liptako Gourma Authority. (2024). Historique de la création. Liptako Gourma.
Litako-Gourma Authority. Résumé Stratégie d’Intervention de l’ALG. Litako-Gourma Authority. https://liptakogourma.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Resume-SI_ALG.pdf
MNJTF (2020). About The Force. Force Multinational Mixte. https://mnjtffmm.org/about/
MNJTF (2020). Civil Military Cooperation. MNJTF. https://mnjtffmm.org/cimic/
MNJTF (2020). Sectors. Force Multinational Mixte. https://mnjtffmm.org/sectors/
Supplementary protocol A/SP.1/7/85 on the code of conduct for the implementation of the protocol on free movement of persons, the right of residence and establishment. (1985, July 6). Economic Community of West African States. https://ecotis.ecowas.int/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ASP.1785-on-the-CODE-OF-CONDUCT-FOR-THE-IMPLEMENTATION-OF-THE-PROTOCOL-ON-FREE-MOVEMENT-OF-PERSONS-THE-RIGHT-OF-RESIDENCE-AND-ESTABLISMENT.pdf
Supplementary protocol A/SP.2/5/90 on the implementation of the third phase (right of establishment) of the protocol on free movement of persons, right of residence and establishment. (1990, May 30). UN Trade and Development (UNCTAD). https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/international-investment-agreements/treaty-files/3270/download
The UN Refugee Agency. (2015). Statement [made on behalf of the Security Council, at the 7362nd meeting, 19 January 2015, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts"]. United Nations.
Treaty of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). (1975, May 28). Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
UNDP. (2019). FACT SHEET Regional Stabilization Facility for Lake Chad Basin. UNDP. https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/africa/Factsheet--Lake-Chad-Basin-Regional-Stabilization-Facility.pdf
United Nations. (1999). Treaty Series Treaties and international agreements registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the United Nations. United Nations (pp. 39-49).
United Nations. (2013, February 22). Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Plenary and Working Groups Meetings, United Nations. https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/documents/Information%20Note%20Paris%20FATF%20Meeting%20Feb%202013-8.pdf
United Nations. (2017, June 21). Security Council Welcomes Deployment of Joint Force to Combat Terrorism Threat, Transnational Crime in Sahel, Unanimously Adopting Resolution 2359 (2017). United Nations. https://press.un.org/en/2017/sc12881.doc.htm
UNSC. (2022, May 18). Amid Alarm over Mali’s Withdrawal from Regional Security Architecture, Top Peace Official Briefs Security Council on Challenges to Ending Terrorism in Sahel. Reliefweb. https://reliefweb.int/report/mali/amid-alarm-over-malis-withdrawal-regional-security-architecture-top-peace-official-briefs-security-council-challenges-ending-terrorism-sahel
UNSC. (2023, August 29). Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council. United Nations. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n23/255/61/pdf/n2325561.pdf
WAPIS Programme. (2021). INTERPOL. https://www.interpol.int/en/How-we-work/Capacity-building/WAPIS-Programme
World Bank (2008). ICR Review Independent Evaluation Group. World Bank.
Secondary Data
Abrahamsen, R. (2018). Return to the general? Global militarism in Africa from the Cold War to the present. Security Dialogue, 49, 19–31. doi:10.1177/ 0967010617742243
Abu, S., & Ahmed, A. O. (2021). Cooperation between the countries around Lake Chad Basin: An assessment. Asian Social Science, 17(12), 1-11.
Abubakar, D. (2023, March 12). The Role of Foreign Actors in African Security. Springer Nature Link.
Accord (2018, September 18). The Joint Force of the G5 Sahel. Accord. https://www.accord.org.za/conflict-trends/the-joint-force-of-the-g5-sahel/
Adams, I. A. (2019). ECOWAS: Trajectory from Economic to Regional Security Organisation. Journal of Management and Social Sciences, 8(2), 608-623.
Adaramola, O. (2025). Assessing the Role of the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money Laundering in West Africa (GIABA) in Light of Virtual Assets and Cross-Regional Cryptocurrency-Based Money Laundering in Nigeria. Journal of Economic Criminology, 100129.
Adetuyi, A. (2021). Military coup and its effect on the democratization process in Mali and in the region. IPSS Policy Brief, 15(5), 1-10.
Africa Business Communities. (2023, March 14). ECOWAS Has a Responsibility to Protect West Africa from Criminals. Africa Business Communities. https://africabusinesscommunities.com/features/mission-ecowas-has-a-responsibility-to-protect-west-africa-from-criminals.html
AfricaNews. (2025, April). Mali's withdrawal from G5 Sahel effective from June 30. Africanews. https://www.africanews.com/2022/06/17/malis-withdrawal-from-g5-sahel-effective-from-june-30//
Albert, I. O. (2017). Rethinking the functionality of the multinational joint task force in managing the Boko Haram Crisis in the Lake Chad Basin. Africa Development, 42(3), 119-135.
AlJazeera. (2021, May 31). ECOWAS suspends Mali over second coup in nine months. AlJazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/5/31/ecowas-suspends-mali-over-second-coup-in-nine-months
AlJazeera. (2022, January 28). ECOWAS suspends Burkina Faso after military coup. AlJazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/1/28/ecowas-suspends-burkina-faso-after-coup
AlJazeera. (2022, May 16). Mali government pulls military out of regional G5 Sahel force. Aljazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/5/16/mali-government-pulls-military-out-of-regional-g5-sahel-force?traffic_source=KeepReading
Allafrica. (2002, September 19). West Africa: Ecowas Criminal Bureau to Be Established. Allafrica.  https://allafrica.com/stories/200209180689.html
Aniekwe, C. C., & Brooks, K. (2023). Multinational Joint Task Force: Lessons for Comprehensive Regional Approaches to Cross-Border Conflict in Africa. Journal of International Peacekeeping, 26(4), 330-349.
Apau, R., & Banunle, A. (2019). Terrorism, violent extremism and insurgency in the Sahel region: An assessment. on Terrorism, 1.
Appolinaire, R., Soumaïne, A., Borgoto, A., & Simon, A. (2012). Lake Chad: Meanwhile waiting for the safeguard, stopping on the management of the potentialities of the area. OIDA International Journal of Sustainable Development, 4(11), 63-94.
Appolinaire, R., Soumaïne, A., Borgoto, A., & Simon, A. (2012). Lake Chad: Meanwhile waiting for the safeguard, stopping on the management of the potentialities of the area. OIDA International Journal of Sustainable Development, 4(11), 63-94.
Ateku, A. J. (2020). Regional intervention in the promotion of democracy in West Africa: An analysis of the political crisis in the Gambia and ECOWAS’coercive diplomacy. Conflict, Security & Development, 20(6), 677-696.
Azu, V. N., & Inyikalum, D. (2024). Security Sector Reforms and Security in North East Nigeria. South East Journal of Political Science, 10(1).
Bakhoum, H. (2004). ECOWAS as Regional Peace Broker. Austrian Federal Ministry of Defence. https://www.bmlv.gv.at/pdf_pool/publikationen/sorting_out_the_mess_ecowas_regional_peace_broker_h_bakhoum.pdf
Baldaro, E., & D'Amato, S. (2023, October 31). A tale of regional transformation: From political community to security regions the politics of security and regionalism in West Africa. Territory, Politics, Governance, 12(4), 519-536.
Bere, M. (2024). Terrorism in the Sahel. In The Routledge Companion to Terrorism Studies (pp. 63-69). Routledge.
Beyi, W. A. (2023). La Charte du Liptako-Gourma: quelles analyses sociologiques du format politique ou sociale de l’institution.
Brown, J. M. (2020). Force of words: the role of threats in terrorism. Terrorism and political violence, 32(7), 1527-1549.
Camara, A. (2020). The G5 Sahel: Security implementation and challenges. Open Journal of Political Science, 10(3), 493-506.
Center for civilians in Conflict. (2019). The Sahel. Center for civilians in Conflict. https://civiliansinconflict.org/our-work/where-we-work/g5-sahel-joint-force/
Cilliers, J. (2003). Terrorism and Africa. African Security Studies, 12(4), 91-103.
CivilPol. (2025). Projet d'Appui au G5S pour la sécurité au Sahel. CivilPol. https://www.civipol.fr/fr/projets/projet-dappui-au-g5s-pour-la-securite-au-sahel
Cooper, H. H. (2001). Terrorism: The problem of definition revisited. American behavioral scientist, 44(6), 881-893.
Crisis Group, Report №291 (2020, July 7). What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?. CrisisGroup.
Crisis Group. (2021, February 1)A Course Correction for the Sahel Stabilisation Strategy. Crisis Group. https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/sahel-burkina-faso-mali-niger/course-correction-sahel-stabilisation-strategy
Daoust, G., & Selby, J. (2023). Understanding the politics of climate security policy discourse: the case of the Lake Chad Basin. Geopolitics, 28(3), 1285-1322.
Dağ, F. (2023). Challenges to The Evolution of G5 Sahel into A Regional Security Integration. Anemon Muş Alparslan Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 11(Afrika), 152-162.
Dennis, P. M., & Brown, M. L. (2018). The ECOWAS: from regional economic organization to regional peacekeeper. In Comparative Regional Integration (pp. 249-270). Routledge.
Dieng, M. (2019). The Multi-National Joint Task Force and the G5 Sahel Joint force: The limits of military capacity-building efforts. Contemporary Security Policy, 40(4), 481-501.
Eke, J. U., & Ani, K. J. (2017). Africa and the challenges of regional integration. Journal of African Union Studies, 6(1), 63-80.
El Khou, B. D. (2019). The G5 Sahel: An Insufficient Organization for a Failed Region? (Master's thesis, Old Dominion University).
European Union. (2018, March 6). Les plateformes de coopération en matière de sécurité : un outil stratégique en voie d'opérationnalisation dans les pays du G5. Emergency Trust Fund for Africa. https://trust-fund-for-africa.europa.eu/news/les-plateformes-de-cooperation-en-matiere-de-securite-un-outil-strategique-en-voie-2018-03-06_en
Ewi, M.. (2013, March 13). The new ECOWAS Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its implications for West Africa. Institute for Security Studies. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/the-new-ecowas-counter-terrorism-strategy-and-its-implications-for-west-africa
Forest, JJ. & Giroux, J., 2011. Terrorism and political violence in Africa: Contemporary trends in a shifting terrain. Perspective on Terrorism, 5(3-4).
France24. (2021, May 30) West African bloc ECOWAS suspends Mali over coup. France24. https://www.france24.com/en/africa/20210530-west-african-bloc-ecowas-suspends-mali-from-its-institutions-after-coup
Frowd, P. M., & Sandor, A. J. (2018, January 1). Militarism and its limits: Sociological insights on security assemblages in the Sahel. Sage Journals.
Fuchs, P. (1996). Nomadic society, civil war, and the state in Chad. Nomadic Peoples, 151-162.
G-NexID. (2023). ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development. Global Network of Export-Import Banks and Development Finance Institutions. https://gnexid.com/ecowas-bank-for-investment-and-development/
Galeazzi, G., Medinilla, A., Ebiede, T. M., & Desmidt, S. (2017). Understanding the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC). European Centre for Development policy management, 186-207.
Gandois, H. (2009). The emergence of regional security organisations. A comparative study on ECOWAS and SADC (Doctoral dissertation, Oxford University, UK).
Global South Dialogue on Economic Crime. (2022). Financial Task Force (FATF)'S AML/CFT Standarts: An Analysis of Compliance and Effectiveness Status of Assessed Countries under the 4th Round and its FSRB Equivalent. GSDEC. https://gsdec.network/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/FATFS-AML-CFT-STANDARD-Analysis-of-the-Compliance-Effectiveness-Status-Final.pdf
Global Terrorism Index (2015, November 7). Measuring and Understanding the Impact of Terrorism. Institute for Economics and Peace.
Golovko, E. (2021). Re-imagining Sahelian political space, a postcolonial perspective.
Grütjen (2024, June). Current Developments in West Africa’s Regional Integration – Challenges for the Future Design of Foreign and Development Policy. German Institute of Development and Sustainability.
Halidu, A., Cornelius, S. S., & Olaiya, L. (2024). Assessment of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) 1999 and 2001 protocols in the resolution of the Gambian post-election crisis.
Hanasaki, N., Yoshikawa, S., Pokhrel, Y., & Kanae, S. (2018). A global hydrological simulation to specify the sources of water used by humans. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 22(1), 789-817.
Impact Assessment (2014, April 14). Environmental and Social Risk Assessment of the Lake Chad Conventional Basin. Impact Assessment.
International Crisis Group. (2022). What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?. International Crisis Group.
Jaló, S. (2023). Guinea-Bissau: 30 years of militarized democratization (1991–2021). Frontiers in Political Science, 5, 1078771.
Jooji, I. (2017). The ECOMOG high command: Implications for the socioeconomic development of the West African sub-region. Education and Science Journal of Policy Review and Curriculum Development, 7(1), 37-44.
Kangaspunta, K. (2003, December). Mapping the inhuman trade: Preliminary findings of the database on trafficking in human beings. In Forum on crime and society (Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 81-103).
Koné, H. (2022, November 14). Options for reviving security cooperation in the Sahel. Institute for Security Studies.
Lefaso. (2019, March, 24). Espace G5 Sahel : La Plateforme de coopération en matière de sécurité peaufine ses actions à Ouagadougou. Lefaso. https://lefaso.net/spip.php?article88745
Lopez-Lucia, E. (2020, October). A tale of regional transformation: From political community to security regions the politics of security and regionalism in West Africa. Political Geography, 82.
Lyammouri, R. (2021). For Mali and the Sahel, new tensions and an old–and worsening–security problem. Middle East Institute, 2021-11.
Maconga, C. W. (2023). Arid fields where conflict grows: How drought drives extremist violence in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Development Perspectives, 29, 100472.
MapAfrica. (2023, January 4). Regional - ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development (EBID). MapAfrica. https://mapafrica.afdb.org/en/projects/46002-P-Z1-HAA-106
McCullough, A., & Sandor, A. (2023). Briefing: How a mutiny became a (nother) coup: The politics of counterinsurgency and international military partnerships in Niger. African Affairs, 122(489), 587-601.
McGowan, P. J. (2003). African military coups d'état, 1956–2001: frequency, trends and distribution. The Journal of Modern African Studies, 41(3), 339-370.
Medu, K. O., & Sanubi, F. (2023) Collective Security: Role of ECOWAS in dealing with Regional Terrorism and Coups.
Moravcsik, A. (1998). The Choice for Europe: Social Purpose and State Power from Messina to Maastricht. Routledge.
Ndiaga, T., & Akorlie, C. (2022, January 29). West African bloc suspends Burkina Faso after military coup. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/w-african-bloc-ecowas-suspends-burkina-faso-after-military-coup-sources-2022-01-28/
Nigeria Network of NGOs. (2023). Understanding the Role of GIABA. NNNGO. https://web.nnngo.org/understanding-the-role-of-giaba/
Njeuma, M. Z., & Malaquais, D. (2004). Coopération internationale et transformation du Bassin du Lac Tchad. Politique africaine, 94(2), 23-41.
Obamamoye, B. F. (2017). Counter-terrorism, Multinational Joint Task Force and the missing components. African identities, 15(4), 428-440.
Odada, E. O., Oyebande, L., & Oguntola, A. J. (2005). Lake Chad: experience and lessons learned brief.
Office National D’Edition t De Presse. (2018, August 15). Réunion des experts de l'Autorité de développement intégrée du Liptako Gourma (ALG) : Les experts planchent sur plusieurs questions relatives à l'institution. LeSahel. https://www.lesahel.org/reunion-des-experts-de-lautorite-de-developpement-integree-du-liptako-gourma-alg-les-experts-planchent-sur-plusieurs-questions-relatives-a-linstitution/
Ofuatey‐Kodjoe, W. (1994). Regional organizations and the resolution of internal conflict: The ECOWAS intervention in Liberia. International Peacekeeping, 1(3), 261-302.
Ogwuche, A. I., & Serah, A. D. (2010). ECOWAS and Regional Peacekeeping Integration: A Review of Challenges.
Okon, E. N., & Ojakorotu, V. (2022). Is ECOWAS a Security Community?. Journal of African Union Studies, 11(3), 27-48.
Omotosho, F. O., & Senghore, A. A. (2018). The Gambia and the 2016/2017 political impasse: An impact assessment of the peace and security implications on the nation’s economy and the international legal justifications for/against ECOWAS intervention, January, 2017-February, 2018. International Affairs and Global Strategy, 63, 44-54.
Onana Ibogo, F. M. (2023). A framework for the sustainable management of water resources in Lake Chad (Doctoral dissertation, Technische Universität Wien).
Osuchukwu, C. N., Iteke, W. C., & Emesiani, I. G. The Alliance of Sahel States and the Future of West African Regional Integration.
Pflieger, G., Gallati, L., Rodriguez, A., Wang, Y., Min, K., & Singeorzan, A. (2016, June 5). Mali and Burkina Faso: their bordering tensions.
Planetary Security Initiative. (2021, May 20). Climate Security Practice Spotlight - The Lake Chad Regional Stabilisation Strategy. Planetary Security Initiative. https://www.planetarysecurityinitiative.org/news/climate-security-practice-spotlight-lake-chad-regional-stabilisation-strategy
Primoratz, I. (1990, October). What is terrorism?. Journal of Applied Philosophy, 7(2), 129-138. 
Sandor, A. (2016, October). Assemblages of Intervention: Politics, Security, and Drug Trafficking in West Africa. University of Ottawa.
Sandor, A., Frowd, P. M., & Hönke, J. (2024). Productive failure, African agency, and security cooperation in West Africa: The case of the G5 Sahel. European Journal of International Security, 1-19.
Sasvári, S. T. (2014, June 16). Why Some Private Security and Military Companies Succeed and Others Fail in Taking Over Public Tasks. Copenhagen Business School.
Shumilova, O., Tockner, K., Thieme, M., Koska, A., & Zarfl, C. (2018). Global water transfer megaprojects: a potential solution for the water-food-energy nexus?. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 6, 150.
The European Land Force Commander Organisation (2023, August 11). ECOWAS Imposes Sanctions Against Niger Following The 26 July Military Coup. FINABEL. https://finabel.org/ecowas-imposes-sanctions-against-niger-following-the-26-july-military-coup/
This Day. (2025). Reuters: Niger Withdraws from MNJTF  in Blow to Fight Against Terrorism. This Day. https://www.thisdaylive.com/index.php/2025/03/31/reuters-niger-withdraws-from-mnjtf-in-blow-to-fight-against-terrorism/
Tull, D. M. (2017). Mali, the G5 and Security Sector Assistance: Political Obstacles to Effective Cooperation. SWP Comments 52. Berlin: Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik German-Institute for International and Security Affairs.
UN Migration. (2000). Study on Border Community Perception of border security and Management in the Liptako-Gourma Region. https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/Perception-Study-Liptako-Gourma.pdf
UNDP (2023, March). Regional study on CIMIC good practices and lessons on The Implementation Of UNDP Stabilization Programme In The Lake Chad Basin. UNDP. https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-09/regional_study_on_cimic_best_practices.pdf
United Nations Human Rights, Office of The High Commissioner (2022). Project supporting the G5 Sahel Joint Force with Implementation of the Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law Compliance Framework. UN.
United Nations Security Council: Resolution 1464 (2003). (2003, February 4). United Nations. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/486635?v=pdf
United Nations Security Council: Resolution 1509 (2003). (2003, September 19). United Nations. https://www.iilj.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/SC-Resolution-1509.pdf
United Nations. (2016, February 3). Sahel strategy against crime and terrorism shows latest results. Office on Drugs and Crime.
United Nations. (2020, November 16). Conseil de sécurité: le Secrétaire général adjoint aux opérations de paix met en avant «  l’élan opérationnel » de la Force conjointe du G5 Sahel. United Nations. 
UNOPS (2002, July 30). Africa Region-Reversal of Land and Water Degradation. Trends in the Lake Chad Basin Ecosystem. World Bank.
UNSC (2023, May 15). G5 Sahel Joint Force: Briefing and Consultations. Security Council Report. 
Walther, O., & Retaille, D. (2010). Sahara or Sahel? The fuzzy geography of terrorism in West Africa. Ceps/Instead Working Papers, (2010-35).
Welz, M. (2022). Institutional choice, risk, and control: The G5 Sahel and conflict management in the Sahel. International Peacekeeping, 29(2), 235-257.
Xinhua. (2023, December 16). ECOWAS formally suspends Niger's membership. Xinhua. https://english.news.cn/20231216/300be861f406424a8067574b8a5c012c/c.html
Гринин, Л. Е. (2020). Движение обществ к зрелым социально-политическим и экономическим отношениям как длительный фактор возможной дестабилизации в странах афразийской макрозоны нестабильности. In Системный мониторинг глобальных и региональных рисков (pp. 666-693).
