GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

NATIONAL RESEARCH UNIVERSITY 
HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

SCHOOL OF INNOVATION AND INTERPRENEURSHIP

MASTER OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS PROGRAM









MASTER THESIS

Topic: Product Standardization and Adaptation Dilemma in Beauty Companies’ International Marketing Strategies in Asia: the Case of Estée Lauder and Coty in China and Japan








Student
Anna Yaskina

Research Advisor
Maria Pinson
Guest Lecturer









Moscow 2024
Introduction

When entering a new country, a company must answer several key questions: “What (what will be the object of sale)?”, “Why (why is entering a new market necessary)?”, “How (what should be the entry strategy?)”, “Where (which country, which market and segment)?”, “When? (what is the best time to enter?)”. This paper addresses important aspects of the answer to the first question, so it is relevant and topical for the field of international business. 
For the author of the research, an additional interest is that her position as a Product manager involves the formation of international marketing strategy as one of the tasks in practice. 
The significance of this topic lies in its potential to contribute to the body of knowledge on international marketing strategy. The dilemma of standardization and adaptation has been the subject of extensive academic research, but at the moment there is no in-depth study of this aspect in relation to the product in beauty companies in Asian countries. Moreover, there is a methodology for determining the degree of standardization/adaptation, but none of modern researchers have applied it to this element of the marketing mix in the region and industry we are considering. We try to close this research gap in our work.
The object of our research is international marketing strategy. The subject reflects the specifics of the industry: international marketing strategy of beauty companies. The key research question addressed to the specifics of one element of the marketing mix and the market: How is product standardization and adaptation dilemma in international marketing strategies is solved by beauty companies in Asia? Thus, the main goal of our work is to find out how the dilemma of product standardization and adaptation is solved by beauty companies’ international marketing strategies in Asian countries.
To conduct our research, first of all, we needed to review current literature on the object, subject and find an answer to the key research question. We then conducted our own analysis of the product international marketing strategies of two beauty companies in two market segments and in two Asian countries. We applied the method of determining the degree of product standardization/adaptation and calculated the value for the strategies of the two companies.
We conducted a comprehensive study by utilizing both secondary and primary types of research. Secondary research was used when we studied the current literature on the topic, whereas primary research was used when we delved into the strategies of specific companies. Furthermore, we utilized both qualitative and quantitative research methods throughout our study. Qualitative research was predominantly used when we analyzed the literature and product portfolios of the companies. On the other hand, quantitative research was used to calculate the results of our primary research and form conclusions based on the findings.
Our work includes the discussion about advantages and disadvantages of both strategies – standardization and adaptation. In practice, these types can be used together not only in relation to different elements of the marketing mix, but also within one of the elements. Therefore, we also consider methods of calculating the degree of standardization/adaptation of the 4P complex. We studied the international marketing strategies of beauty companies, and then with an in-depth look at the product and in a specific region, Asia. In most of the cases described in the articles, adaptation was applied, without information on the degree. Then we analyzed international marketing product strategies of two beauty companies and found that they applied a low degree of adaptation, which affected only a few product components.








1. Theoretical aspects of product standardization and adaptation dilemma in beauty companies’ international marketing strategies in Asia
1.1 Literature study on international marketing strategies

With increasing globalization, companies have more and more opportunities to enter new markets and expand their activities to other countries. Those companies that do not consider going international risk losing opportunities to benefit from economies of scale and to gain a significant share or even become a leader in a market where demand for their product is just emerging (Perrault, McCarthy, 1996:68-69). However, it is worth not losing sight of the fact that entering international markets is not just an increase in the size of the company's sales market. In fact, this process is much more complex, and the local market cannot be equated with the international one in nature. When entering a new market, a company is faced with a new environment, which has its own individual components: cultural, legal, political and financial systems (Onkvisit, Sak, Shaw, 2004:5). And most importantly from a marketing point of view, the company is faced with a new competitive environment and a new consumer, who may have their own needs and their own consumer model, which differ from the situation in the local market. 
Like any other part of entrepreneurship, marketing activities must have a specific goal and an action plan to achieve it. Kotler and Keller in Marketing Management (2012) identifies the following parts of marketing activities: analyzing market opportunities, creating a marketing strategy, planning marketing programs and managing marketing activities. The “creating a marketing strategy” part is responsible for goal setting and planning of all activities. There are various definitions of marketing strategy in the literature, but the most important thing that unites them is the consideration of marketing strategy as a plan of action aimed at connecting a company with the desired market and consumer and generating income from it. Shankar and Carpenter in Handbook of marketing strategy (2012), for example, give a rather broad definition in terms of influencing the buyer: 
“Marketing strategy is defined as an organization’s integrated pattern of decisions that specify its critical choices concerning marketing behaviors or actions directed at customers to effect specific affective, cognitive and behavioral predispositions in them towards its product offering in order to facilitate their engaging in revenue-generating transactional and relational exchanges with the organization and thereby enable the organization to achieve specific objectives.”
The marketing mix can be explained as a specific combination of marketing variables offered to the market at any given time, and these marketing variables include product, price, place, and promotion (Kotler, Armstrong, Saunders, Wong, 2008:24). For many years these have been the principal foundations on which a marketing plan is based on. The extended marketing mix also includes people, processes, and the physical environment, as well as the four major components mentioned above (Kotliarov, 2012).
Marketing strategies are developed to achieve marketing objectives through various methods and methodical coordination to ensure planning, marketing and innovative solutions (Haeruddin, Musa, Kurniawan, 2023:19). Considering the previously stated difficulties of entering the international market, it can be assumed that an international marketing strategy differs from one aimed at application in the local market. Marketing aimed at one or more host countries is called international marketing. Shankar and Carpenter in the Handbook of marketing strategy (2012) give the following definition of international marketing strategy:
“Global marketing strategy is defined as an organization's integrated pattern of decisions that specify its crucial choices concerning marketing behaviors directed at customers in multiple country markets to effect specific affective, cognitive and behavioral predispositions in them towards its product offering in order to facilitate their engaging in revenue-generating transactional and relational exchanges with the organization and thereby enable the organization to achieve specific objectives.”
Traditionally, in the literature, types of marketing strategies were determined by the change or lack of change in these four main components of the marketing mix, depending on the country in which the company enters the market. From this point of view, there are two main international marketing strategies – standardization and adaptation. The first involves using the same marketing mix (product, price, place, promotion) in all markets. The second involves changing the marketing mix depending on the needs of each market (Gupta, Randhawa, 2008).
However, in modern literature there are other approaches for defining types of marketing strategies. One of them is based on concentration-dispersion perspective. At the head of this theory is the geographical marketing design of a company or the spread of its value-chain activities. International marketing strategies thus differ according to the extent to which one or more aspects of the marketing value chain are "concentrated" in specific geographical locations (concentrated strategy) or "dispersed" across markets in different countries (dispersed strategy) (Lim, Acito, Rusetski, 2006).
The next approach is based on how a company perceives its subsidiary in another country – as an independent center and source of profit (independent unit) or as part of a larger center and as a part of the whole strategy (integrated unit). It called the integration-independence perspective: strategies in this case differ depending on the intensity of the subsidiary's consultations with the parent and on the integration of actions in different markets (Lim et al., 2006).
But still the basic and traditional approach is to divide international marketing strategies into standardization and adaptation. In this paper we will focus on it.
Standardization involves using the same range of products, the same pricing, promotion and placement strategies (Gupta, Randhawa, 2008). 
There are two main factors affecting the maximization of the value of standardization: the development of technology, which improves market interrelationships and, through market interactions, shapes consumer preferences; and the process of globalization, which determines economic realities.
The literature identifies the following main benefits of the standardization strategy:
Economies of scale: standardization of the marketing strategy can significantly reduce costs, for example, for local market research, development and promotion specifically for each region. This in turn enables a brand to invest more in its global marketing activities and/or have more competitive pricing than its local competitors (Ryans, Griffith, White, 2003:594).
A brand image can be effectively strengthened by applying standardization. Global brands with a consistent and unified image regardless of country of presence are perceived by consumers as more prestigious and premium. This affects the quality and market segment with which customers associate the brand (Ghantous, 2008).
Monitoring the results of marketing communications at a high level also enhances the success of the standardization strategy. In other words, because there is little or no difference in the marketing communication strategy due to the standardization approach, the same set of tools can be used to assess the levels of success of the marketing strategy in relation to each geographical market segment with positive consequences for the levels of cost-effectiveness (Ghantous, 2008).
The strength of this strategy is the simplicity: no need to alter product to meet local specifics (Komleva, Karnitskaya, Karnitskaya, Smirnov, 2023).
However, standardization is also subject to criticism. The main arguments about the disadvantages of the strategy can be summarized as follows:
The product might not satisfy the customers (Horska´, Ubreziova, Kekäle, 2007). Unique aspects of local culture can have a huge impact on the perception of the marketing mix as a whole and each marketing element in particular.
The use of standardization reduces the level of business flexibility in new markets. In other words, global businesses using this strategy are less able to respond to changes in individual markets than local businesses or businesses using an adaptation strategy (Kotler et al., 2008:961-963).
There is a risk of losing to local brands that are more popular in the local market (Komleva et.al., 2023).

Adaptation is “a firm’s consistent and planned activities to meet local consumers’ preferences and values” (Calantone, Cavusgil, Schmidt, Shin, 2004: 178). An adaptation strategy involves making significant changes to different aspects of products and services in order to meet the needs of consumers in international markets, taking into account their differences (Panevchik, Samoylov, Kakoshko, 2012).
The literature identifies the following main benefits of the adaptation strategy:
Attractiveness of the product and satisfaction of needs to the greatest extent by taking into account local traditions and preferences. Horska et al. (2007) note the following: “End customers – human beings – develop a sense of belongingness to a worldwide culture, by adopting practices, styles, and information that are part of the global culture. In this way they create the global identity. However, in parallel, people continue to hold their local identity as based on their socialization to their local culture”.
Adaptation can therefore improve brand positioning and recognition by respecting local culture (Komleva et.al.,2023).
In some cases, large companies, through the implementation of an adaptation strategy, can become pioneers and take full advantage of this position, initiating changes in certain markets (Schmidt, Tyler, Brennan, 2007).
The disadvantages of an adaptation strategy can be summarized as the following arguments:
An adaptation strategy usually eliminates the chance of benefiting from economies of scale. In addition, learning about the local culture in order to integrate this knowledge into elements of the marketing mix can be a costly initiative. It may increase development, manufacturing, packaging and distribution costs (Kotler et al., 2008:961-963).
Low speed of implementation: the process of gaining in-depth knowledge of local market specifications and adjusting the elements of the marketing mix accordingly takes a long time. During this period, the market may be saturated with local enterprises or foreign enterprises pursuing a standardization strategy (Ghantous, 2008).
An adaptation strategy implemented at an extreme scale and of an inappropriate quality could jeopardize the core competitive advantage of the global brand, leading to a degradation of the company's image (Komleva et.al., 2023).

Both standardization and adaptation have their pros and cons. Thus, it can be argued that there is no clear idea that one strategy is better than another under any conditions and markets. Moreover, in real life it is difficult to find examples of pure standardization and pure adaptation. A company can apply different strategies for different elements of the marketing mix: some elements cannot be changed, but others can be adapted for different countries. This method is even considered the most optimal solution in some studies. Also in research, the impact of standardization and adaptation is studied for various elements of the marketing mix separately, since it has been proven that the impact on company performance varies according to the main elements of the marketing mix (Lages, Jap, Griffith, 2008). 

But then there is also the question of how to determine whether a product is standardized or adapted, because a company may not produce a completely new product/service for the international market, but only make some changes to an existing one. Here we come across such an aspect as the degree of adaptation. Let’s look at how it is measured in the current literature.
Katsikeas, Samiee, Theodosiou (2006) in their study, to measure the degree of adaptation of a particular marketing element, first divide it into specific components. So, the product consists of:
Product design and style;
Product quality;
Brand name;
Packaging;
Labeling;
Warranties;
Pre- and after-sales service.

The price has the following components:
Selling price to trade customers;
Selling price to end-users;
Profit margins to trade customers;
Profit margins to end-users;
Sales terms.

Promotion:
Advertising message;
Advertising creative presentation;
Advertising media strategy;
Sales promotion tools;
Publicity and public relations activities;
Personal selling techniques.

Place/distribution:
Length of distribution channels;
Type of middlemen used;
Distribution coverage;
Control over distribution channels;
Inventory controls;
Order processing systems.

Next, each part is rated on a seven-point scale, where 1 is ‘very different’, 7 is ‘very similar’.
A similar approach is found in the study by Theodosiou and Leonidou (2003), which accumulates the results of modern research on the topic of standardization and adaptation. Therefore, there are significantly more components of marketing elements here:
For product:
General product 
Positioning 
Design/style 
Quality 
Features/character
Brand/branding 
Packaging 
Labeling 
Services 
Warranty 
Items/models in product line.

Price:
General price 
Pricing method/strategy 
Retail price 
Wholesale/trade price 
Profit margins to trade customers
Profit margins to end–users 
Discounts 
Sales/credit terms.

Promotion:
General promotion 
Advertising (overall) 
Creative/execution style 
Message/theme 
Media allocation 
Sales promotion 
Salesforce structure/management 
Salesforce role 
Publicity/public relations 
Personal selling 
Advertising/promotion budget 

Distribution:
General distribution 
Channels of distribution 
Physical distribution 
Type of middlemen/retail outlets 
Role of middlemen.
To measure the degree of adaptation for each component of the elements of the marketing mix, this work uses a 100-point scale, where 1 is complete standardization, 100 is complete adaptation. Since the various studies whose results it accumulates used their own scales, they needed to be brought to a single measurement.
Hultman, Robson, Katsikeas (2009) in their study focused on one element of the marketing mix – the product. To assess the degree of adaptation, they identify the following components:
1. Product quality
2. Product design and style
3. Product features/performance
4. Product branding
5. Product packaging.
Next, each component is rated on a seven-point scale, where 1 is “highly standardized,” and 7 is “highly adapted.”

Kotulla and Schmidt (2016) in their study similarly address only the product, but identify more components for it:
Product name;
Product positioning;
Product quality;
Product ingredients;
Product effect/taste;
Product scent/smell;
Product colour;
Product packaging design;
Product packaging size;
 Models in product line.
Further, each element is also rated on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 is the lowest degree of standardization (i.e., essentially adaptation), 7 is the highest degree of standardization.

Thus, we can summarize which components of the elements of the marketing mix are most often identified in modern research, and how they are assessed to measure the degree of adaptation:
Table 1
Method of measuring the degree of standardization/adaptation

Source: compiled by the authors based on studies: Katsikeas et. al. (2006), Theodosiou and Leonidou (2003), Hultman et. al. (2009), Kotulla and Schmidt (2016)











1.2 Review of previous research on international marketing strategies in beauty companies

The choice of an international marketing strategy largely depends on the industry in which the company operates (Zaiem, Zghidi, 2011). This is especially true for a product, since the market determines its type – consumer goods or industrial products. Most studies indicate that standardization is more suitable for the second type (Tan, Sousa, 2013). This is due to the fact that the main purpose of industrial products is to perform a certain functionality, when, as consumer goods, they often also affect the emotional needs of a person, which is to some extent influenced by culture (Mandler, Sezen, Chen, 2020).
The beauty industry aims to cover the needs for caring for the body, skin, hair and creating an attractive appearance, therefore it can be identified as a market of consumer goods. Based on the above, according to existing research, adaptation should be quite common in this industry. We will verify this assumption by examining the international marketing strategies of the companies described in the existing articles. First of all, we will look at examples of different strategies for such an element of the marketing mix as a product.

Adaptation was used by the Chinese company Perfect Diary when entering markets in other countries. A detailed study of market trends and features allowed the company to create products aimed at consumers in different countries. For example, for the Japanese market, Perfect Diary developed a lipstick together with the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which has small gold gems, and a gift box branded with a girl from a popular Japanese anime. For the countries of Southeast Asia, the company has released additional shades for face cosmetics (powder) and lips. This is because the skin color of consumers in this market is different from the users of the company's products in the home country. In addition, Perfect Diary not only used the launches of additional new products for other countries, but also made changes to the current product, adapting its properties to a specific region. So, for Southeast Asia, the company decided to change the loose powder, focusing on skin oil control, which reflects the needs of customers in this region – there is a high demand for makeup fixing products due to the rather hot climate (Liang, Li, 2022).
Another form of product adaptation could be a change in product volume: for example, some imported herbal cosmetic products from the luxury segment tend to decrease volume in the Thai market. Products for which the standard volume is 100 ml are sold in 50- and 30-ml bottles. This method allows the product to be sold at lower prices, and statistics show that it has a positive effect on sales: products with less bottles sell better (Thanisorn, 2013).
Example of the use of a standardization strategy would be cases when the country of origin provides significant value to the brand. Thus, the Chinese brand Herbolist uses traditional natural ingredients in its products that are used in Chinese medicine. The brand does not change the character and design of its product for host countries and also places a strong emphasis on this when distributing in other countries. Another Chinese brand, Vive, was created decades ago in Shanghai and now emphasizes its authenticity in both advertising and product packaging. In this case, brands are exploiting the perception of traditional Chinese recipes and ingredients as proven and effective, and probably a belief that Asian women generally have clear, even-toned skin (Deighton, Kornfeld, He, Jiang, 2010).
The Natura skincare brand also uses standardization. They base their products on ingredients that they source from the indigenous people of the Amazon. This not only forms the basis of the brand’s positioning as natural and ‘good for the skin’, but also carries a social and environmental agenda. Thus, the company has a clear message that it conveys to its customers both through the product itself and through its promotion, and which does not change depending on the region (Deighton, et al, 2010).

The next element, examples of strategies for which we will consider, is price.
Standardization is used by companies for which it is important to maintain the image of a premium brand, one of the important components of which is price. These are companies that have built strong brands in their country or region, and are trying to maintain and spread the same principles and methods with which they managed to win the trust and love of a large number of consumers. For example, LVMH Moët Hennessy, whose brands include Dior and Guerlain, adheres to the same price from region to region (Mihailovic, Vescovi, Pontiggia, 2017).
The pricing strategy of cosmetics distributors in the host market can be adapted under the influence of local holidays, on which retail stores traditionally organize themed promotions. Thus, analyzed by Rojanadilok and Bunchapattanasakda (2011) case studies of global companies in Thailand show that three out of three brands use partial adaptation: the pricing strategy depends on local promotion: for example, they always give a 10-20% discount on holidays such as summer, Earth Day and Mother’s day. L'Oréal, when entering the Chinese market, applied a price adaptation also related to the company's positioning: in contrast to the home market, the brands were sold as affordable luxury with a price equal to about half of the actual luxury brands (Mihailovic et al., 2017).

For such an element of the marketing mix as promotion, modern research contains striking examples of adaptation.
For example, one of the largest global beauty companies, Unilever, conveyed the message in an advertisement for the Indian market that using the company's products would help a girl find a husband or a good job. Such brand promotion in European countries or the USA would most likely cause bewilderment and a negative attitude towards the company, since in these regions gender equality is promoted and the objectification of women is condemned. However, for India, this can be a fairly effective method of promotion, since such a motive is consistent with local values and traditions and responds to the needs of the target audience (Johnson, 2007).
The Clinique skincare brand in the Asian region places great emphasis on the younger generation, which is most likely due to the fact that the company sees the relevance between the brand and the needs of this target audience, and the greatest potential among other consumer segments. Therefore, when comparing the Chinese website with the Italian one, the differences are obvious: it looks more modern and youthful, and it also features stars who have an influence on the opinion of a young audience, for example, bloggers. Also, as one of the methods of promotion in Asia, Clinique chose to collaborate with one of the Korean bloggers to create online lessons on the use of brand cosmetics. Most likely, using the same marketing materials for another country would not have the same effect, since each region has its own local opinion leaders (Mihailovic et al, 2017).
The company we have already discussed above, Perfect Diary uses local celebrities to attract attention and build trust among consumers in different countries. Thus, to successfully enter the Vietnamese market, a famous pop singer was hired as a brand ambassador, and for Malaysia, the company used the promotion of its product line through local influencer Choy Chua (Liang, Li, 2022).
However, there are also many examples of promotion standardization found in the current literature. For example, one of the Shiseido brands MAQuillAGE does not adapt advertising for the Chinese market: the commercials deliberately feature Japanese celebrities, who, thanks to the spread of Japanese pop culture, are also widely known in China (Oyama., 2009).
Also already considered above brands Herbolist, Vive, Natura, an important element of positioning of which is the country of origin and authenticity of ingredients, do not change their advertising messages, as they have the purpose of creating a consistent image of the company and the product. 

Strategies of beauty companies for such an element of the marketing complex as place are practically not touched upon in modern research. 
However, there is a specific example of standardization for a particular country. One of the factors for the rather successful sales of the Japanese company Shiseido in China is considered to be the opening of a network of stores with high service – consultants who have in-depth knowledge of the product and high skills in selecting cosmetics to suit the needs and individual characteristics of customers. This type of store for the brand originally existed in Japan, where it had already demonstrated its effectiveness. However, when entering the Chinese market, the company did not immediately use this type of distribution, and only a few years later began distributing its products in this way, which helped to withstand the growing competition with other global brands. The proximity of cultures and mentality played a role in the success and efficiency of standardization in this case (Kazuo, 2012). 

​ Thus, having considered examples of the use of adaptation and standardization by different companies presented in the literature, we can identify the main cases of the first and second types of international marketing strategy across the different elements of 4P model:
Table 2
Cases of standardization/adaptation in beauty companies
Table 2 – continues

Source: compiled by the authors based on studies: Liang, Li (2022), Thanisorn (2013), Deighton et al. (2010), Mihailovic et al. (2017), Johnson (2007), Oyama (2009), Kazuo (2012).







1.3 Theoretical background of the dilemma of product standardization and adaptation in beauty companies’ international marketing strategies in Asian countries

The next step in our work is to examine existing research on the international marketing strategies of beauty companies in Asia. 
Even well-known global brands face new challenges when entering Asian markets, and simply being famous does not guarantee success. Differences in culture and values, family structures, economic development, demographic trends, resources, policies, and consumer behavior require multiple strategic directions that emphasize different aspects in different markets (Nguyen, Melewar, Schultz, 2017:3). Despite the fact that Western ideals of beauty are widespread, and had an impact on Asia as well, but overall ideas about beauty in this region have its own distinct characteristics. Large eyes and double eyelids are features that Asian culture has adopted and incorporated into its ideals of beauty. At the same time, white skin, black hair, a high-bridged nose and a sharp chin are what have been preserved in Asian ideas since ancient times (Cho, 2012). 
All this entails the need for beauty companies to carefully develop a marketing strategy for all four elements of the marketing mix when entering the Asian market. In this sub-chapter we will look at examples of international marketing strategies of beauty companies in Asia with a focus on one of the components of the 4P model – the product.
Product is the first “P” of the 4P model. “Product” refers to the goods and services that are offered to a company’s customers. Doole and Lowe (2008) argue that the product is central to the marketing mix. If the product does not meet a customer need and is unattractive to the customer, the other elements of the 4P model can no longer achieve the necessary goal. According to the product market fit concept, the main problem faced by companies, especially startups, is the lack of a product that satisfies the needs of customers. Until a company develops a product that enough people are willing to pay for, it cannot afford to focus on other important tasks related to the other three elements of the marketing mix (Dennehy, Kasraian, O’Raghallaigh, Conboy, 2016).

There are several cases of product adaptation and standardization by beauty companies in Asia available in modern research.
The first known examples are the release of specialized products for the Asian market aimed at lightening the skin. This is connected precisely with one of the features of the local beauty ideal – pure white skin. Moreover, this adaptation case was used not by one, but by a whole list of global companies entering the market of this region. In 1989, the Japanese company Shiseido released a lightening cream, followed by Western brands such as Chanel, Christian Dior and Yves Saint-Laurent in the next few years (Ashikari, 2005). Lancôme's entry into the Chinese market in 1999 was a major success, thanks in large part to the rapid sales of skin lightening products that were not available in Western regions and were also country-specific. Although the company has historically strived to maintain a consistent, prestigious brand image, in order to establish itself in new markets, it has still had to resort to some changes in the product portfolio and adaptation to local needs. Also in a similar situation was Unilever, which, when entering the Indian market, launched skin whitening, which occupied more than half of this product market segment in the region. Again, understanding the local beauty canon, which differs from the Western one, and adapting the product to it led to the brand's success in the new Asian market (Jones, 2011).
Another example of the application of product adaptation to the host country market is the Japanese company Shiseido in China. Even though the company's home country is also Asian and is quite similar in culture to the host country, economic factors still play a role, which prompted Shiseido to launch specialized products under the separate brand Aupres (Kazuo, 2012). So, along with the original brand, Shiseido, when entering the Chinese market, launched another, cheaper brand in order to reach an attractive, wider segment of consumers. Thus, in the Chinese market the company was present in its usual premium cosmetic segment and in the middle segment. Moreover, Shiseido then launched another brand for the Chinese market, even more accessible to consumers – Za. Thus, the company has developed products for the three main distribution channels for cosmetics in China: department stores, specialty stores, and drug stores: the Shiseido brand as a premium brand for high-end stores, Aupres for department stores and Za for pharmacies (Motohashi, 2015:155-171). Thus, in this example we see the adaptation of an international marketing strategy according to two elements of the marketing mix in connection with each other – the launch of a new brand (Product) to reduce the cost (Price) to reach all major distribution channels (Place). As we already mentioned in the previous subchapter, Shiseido in China used a standardization strategy, opened the same stores with high service as in Japan – consultants who have in-depth knowledge of the product and high skills in selecting cosmetics to suit the needs and individual characteristics of customers. As part of the promotion, the Aupres brand places a strong emphasis on exclusivity for the country's market, using the concept of “the inner strength of Chinese women that blossoms through Aupres”. Promotion methods also involve local women with fair skin who advertise the company’s products on their blogs, posting positive reviews.
If we consider the more modern strategies of Western well-known global brands in the Asian market, we can see different degrees of standardization and product adaptation. Of course, such companies have inherent limitations due to the desire to maintain a single brand concept. But research shows that in order to successfully distribute their products in the markets of other countries, they still have to adapt to some extent to local needs and characteristics.
Thus, the French company L'Oréal, one of the world leaders in the cosmetics market, which has in its portfolio skincare, decorative cosmetics and perfume products, in China has focused on the first category of goods due to the regional high demand for skin care. Moreover, the company even opened a research center to study the characteristics of Asian skin and hair in order to use the most suitable ingredients in its products and provide the local market with quality products that cover the need for care as efficiently as possible. Speaking about the company's strategy for other elements of the 4Ps, the price was also changed for the Chinese market: L'Oréal products were decided to be positioned and sold as affordable luxury, with a price equal to half of real luxury brands. For promotion, the company also used an adaptation strategy: Chinese celebrities were involved in advertising campaigns; actress Gong Li became the brand’s “ambassador” in China. The “place” strategy can also be called adaptation: the company sold its products only in those channels where it was possible to use trained consultants, since the “education” factor of buyers played a decisive role in sales. In addition, L'Oréal acquired local brands in order to expand its distribution network.
The American company Estée Lauder, specializing mainly in the prestigious cosmetics segment, followed a similar path: in 2011 it opened its own scientific institute to study the difference in genetics and the reaction of Asian skin to the environment. The result of the research was the Osiao Asia Skin Institute brand, which was launched in 2014 specifically for the Asian market with products that are most effective specifically for local consumers. The brand's products combine the achievements of modern medicine, Chinese traditional ingredients and Western technologies. For promotion in the Chinese market, the company also uses an adaptation strategy: as we mentioned in the previous sub-chapter, one of the company’s brand Clinique in China targets a younger audience and therefore uses special methods. The website of the brand looks more modern and youthful than, for example, Italian one, and it also features stars who have an influence on the opinion of a young audience, for example, bloggers. Also, as one of the methods of promotion in Asia, Clinique chose to collaborate with one of the Korean bloggers to create online lessons on the use of brand cosmetics.
Another example of a global American company adapting to the Asian market is Procter&Gamble with the OLAY skincare brand. The company was so serious about entering this market that it studied it for 4 years before starting sales of its products. Thanks to this, Olay was able to offer not just special products for the Asian consumer, but for different segments of Asian consumers. The brand's lines thus include products for teenagers, young women, and mature women with different problems and care goals. For promotion, OLAY also chose an adaptation strategy: only Chinese models participated in all advertising campaigns from the very beginning of the brand's launch.
The French holding LVMH Moët Hennessy, unlike the companies listed above, has the least degree of adaptation to the Asian market. This is to a certain extent influenced by the status of the company's brands, which are considered the most prestigious and luxury in the world. At the same time, even this company has products that were created specifically for the Asian market – this is the lightening line of the Dior and Blanc Perle brands. The Asian market has also encouraged the company to adapt promotion: a local agency was contracted to run online campaigns for the Dior brand in order to make advertising more attractive to Chinese audiences. In addition, for the brand's TV campaigns, Chinese models were used, the color style was changed and the emphasis was shifted to the effect on the skin. As we already mentioned in the previous subchapter, the price of Dior brand products remains at the same level regardless of the host market, since this is an important factor in the perception of the premium segment brand (Mihailovic, 2017).

The information on cases of standardization and adaptation of international marketing strategies of beauty companies in Asia found in current research can be accumulated as follows in the table:
Table 3
International marketing strategies of beauty companies in Asia
Source: compiled by the authors based on studies: Kazuo (2012), Motohashi (2015), Mihailovic (2017), Jones (2011).

Thus, based on a review of existing studies, it can be concluded that beauty companies most often use adaptation when forming an international product marketing strategy. However, in none of the case studies was there a full analysis of which elements of the product were changed and which were not, nor was there a calculation of the degree of standardization/adaptation. We will try to close this research gap in chapter two.




2. Analysis of the dilemma of product standardization and adaptation in international marketing strategies of Estée Lauder and Coty in China and Japan
 2.1 Overview of the beauty industry

The beauty market encompasses skincare, fragrance, makeup and haircare products. Thus, this industry consists of four main segments (MCKinsey&Company, 2023). All of them are aimed at improving a person’s appearance and attractiveness in various ways. The size of the global beauty market in 2022 was approximately $430 billion in revenue (MCKinsey&Company, 2023). Compared to other industries similar either in production or in purpose of application, this is an average volume: household market size was $319.3 Billion in 2023 (MaxiMize MarketResearch, 2024), apparel market size was $655.7 billion in 2023 (ResearchAndMarkets, 2024).
The beauty industry is showing positive dynamics: the average annual growth rate from 2015 to 2019 was 6%, from 2020 to 2022 – 4% (in this period of time the rate decreased slightly due to COVID), the projected growth from 2022 to 2027 is also 6%. Thus, analysts predict that by 2027 the size of the beauty industry will be $580 billion in revenue. The main growth drivers are:
New geographical locations;
Growing luxury opportunities;
The steady growth in the popularity of wellness technologies (MCKinsey & Company, 2023).

In addition, there are other market trends that companies should pay attention to:
Demand for products for men is growing: sales of cosmetics for this category are growing by 5% annually (Attest, 2022);
Consumers are increasingly paying attention to the composition of products: the absence of harmful chemicals and the presence of organic substances are an absolute plus when choosing cosmetic products (Inkwood Research, 2022).

As we mentioned earlier, the beauty market consists of four main segments: skincare, fragrance, makeup and haircare. All of them show positive dynamics and forecast. The distribution of shares in 2022 was as follows: 44% of the market is skincare ($190 billion), 16% is fragrance ($70 billion), 19% is makeup ($80 billion), 21% is haircare ($90 billion) (MCKinsey&Company, 2023):


Figure 1. Beauty segments shares, value, 2022.
Source: compiled by the authors from the data from MCKinsey&Company Report (2023).

All segments are forecast to grow at a CAGR of 6% from 2023 to 2027, except fragrance, which is forecast to grow at a CAGR of 7%. By 2027, the share distribution is forecast to remain roughly the same: 44% skincare ($260 billion), 17% fragrance ($100 billion), 18% makeup ($105 billion), 21% haircare ($120 billion) (MCKinsey & Company, 2023).
The skincare segment includes both face and body products. Sunscreens, cleansers, toners, and moisturizers are quite a broad segment (Attest, 2023).
The fragrances segment consists of perfumes, toilet water and other body fragrance products excluding deodorants and antiperspirants (Statista, 2023).
The makeup segment is generally divided into the following sub-segments: face, eyes, lips, nails, and natural cosmetics. 
The haircare segment includes products that are used for care (shampoos, conditioners, masks, oils), for styling (varnishes, mousses, foams) and hair coloring (hair dyes, toners) (Statista, 2023b).

The geographic distribution of the beauty market sales has clear leading regions: 25% of global revenue is generated by the Asia Pacific region excluding China ($109 billion), 20% by North America ($85 billion), 17% by Western Europe ($72 billion). China alone accounts for 15% of the market ($66 billion). Next in size are: Latin America with 10% share ($43 billion), Middle East and Africa with 6% share ($27 billion), Eastern Europe with 4% ($19 billion) and Austraiasia with 2% ($7 billion) (MCKinsey & Company, 2023):


Figure 2. The geographic distribution of the beauty market, value, 2022
Source: compiled by the authors from the data from MCKinsey & Company Report (2023).

According to the forecast, in 2027 the distribution of shares between regions will remain approximately the same, growth is observed only in Middle East and Africa (MCKinsey & Company, 2023):

Table 4
Regional shares in beauty market, value
Source: compiled by the authors from the data from MCKinsey & Company Report (2023)

Looking at the growth forecast from 2022 to 2027 across various regions, the largest sub-segments remain skincare in Asia Pacific excluding China, skincare in China, skincare in North America:


Figure 3. Projected sales growth by region and category, 2022-2027, %
Source: MCKinsey & Company, 2023

The fragrance category in China (19%) and in Asia Pacific excluding China (12%), as well as haircare and skincare in Middle East and Africa (12%) are expected to grow at the highest rate (MCKinsey & Company, 2023).
The top-10 beauty product manufacturers include companies such as: L'Oréal, Unilever, The Estée Lauder, Procter & Gamble, Shiseido, LVMH Moët Hennessy, Beiersdorf, Chanel, Natura&Co, and Coty. Data on the revenues of these companies and their share of the total market are presented in the table below (Statista, 2023c):

Table 5
Revenue of top-10 beauty product manufactures in 2022
Source: compiled by the authors from the data from Statista (2023c).

However, as can be seen, the majority of the market (68%) is still made up of many smaller companies whose share is 1% or less, which suggests that while there are obvious leaders, the market is quite differentiated and competitive, with no monopoly.









2.2 International product marketing strategies of Estée Lauder in China and Japan

In this subchapter, we will analyze the international product marketing strategy of one of the largest global beauty companies, Estée Lauder, in two Asian countries, China and Japan. Founded by the couple in 1946 in New York City, the company is now the third largest beauty company in the world ($16 billion in 2022) with a market share of 3.8% (Statista, 2023c). 
Estée Lauder sells its products in approximately 150 countries. The company has three main regions: Asia/Pacific; Europe, the Middle East & Africa; and The Americas. Sales by region are distributed as follows: 28% in The Americas, 33% in Asia/Pacific, and 39% in Europe, the Middle East & Africa (Estée Lauder Annual Report 2023):


Figure 4. Shares of regions in Estée Lauder’s net sales, value, 2023.
Source: compiled by the author from the data from Estée Lauder Annual Report 2023


The company's portfolio covers all major segments of the beauty market: skincare, makeup, fragrance, haircare. The key direction is skincare, which accounts for more than half of net sales (Estée Lauder Annual Report 2023):

Table 6
Share of product categories in Estée Lauder’s net sales
Source: Estée Lauder Annual Report 2023

However, it can be seen that The Estée Lauder is also developing other segments: the makeup share has grown by 2% over the last year, the dynamics of the fragrance share is also positive – the last two years have also seen a 2% growth.

Knowing the share of skincare segment in the company's revenue, we calculated the revenue in this segment as $9.14 bln. Knowing the share of the Asian region in the company's revenue, we calculated the approximate revenue of the skincare segment of the company in Asia – $2.98 bln. Also, with the knowledge of Asia's share in the global skincare market (24.3%) (Statista, 2023d) and global skincare revenue ($190 bln) (MCKinsey & Company, 2023), we have calculated the revenue of the skincare segment in Asia to be $46.17 bln. Thus, we identified the company's approximate skincare market share in Asia – 6.5%. By the same method we calculated the company's share in the fragrance market in Asia – 5.7%.
In the first chapter, we reviewed existing research on the topic of assessing the degree of standardization and adaptation of different components of companies' marketing mix. As we found, the most popular approach is to break down each of the four P's into components, score each of them on a 7-point scale, where 1 is 'very different' (i.e. adaptation), 7 is 'very similar' (i.e. standardization) and calculate the average value. In this paper, we focus on the first P – product, for which the following items are most commonly identified in the existing literature:
Product design and style;
Product quality;
Packaging;
Features/character;
Items/models in product line;
Name;
Labeling;
Warranties;
Pre- and after-sale service;
Positioning;
Brand/branding.

To analyze the international product strategy of beauty companies, we will adhere the following principles:
Brand/branding: if a company has a brand specifically for a given region, it is considered for adaptation (1 point), if the brand is present in both regions – for standardization (7 points), if it is present only on the home market – we do not evaluate it and do not take it into account when calculating the results. 
If the brand exists only on the host market, it is also given 1 point for all the points below.
Then we go deeper into the brands that are represented on the host and home market and evaluate: 
- Items/models in product line (we look at product lines within the category: if the line is not presented in host market –1 point, if it is presented, we compare the number of products in it and according to this we put a point), 
- Positioning.
Then we study product lines within brands and evaluate the following points: 
- Name, 
- Labeling, 
- Product design and style, 
- Features/character.
Next, we count the averages of all the product lines to determine the value of the items above by brand;
And the last step is to calculate the average total for all items within each brand and then for the company as a whole.
Parameters such as Warranties, Pre- and after-sale service for beauty category is not suitable, they are excluded from the analysis. Since Product quality cannot be evaluated in this paper, we do not consider it either. As we mentioned in the previous subchapter, the most interesting segments of the beauty market in Asia are skincare (the biggest one) and fragrance (with the fastest growth). Estée Lauder plays in both segments, so our analysis of the company's product strategy will be done separately for each of them. In this way, we will then be able to compare whether there is a difference in the degree of standardization/adaptation within the same company in different product categories. 
In the skincare segment, the company's portfolio is represented by 12 brands, 10 of which are available on the Chinese market and 7 on the Japanese market:
Table 7
Skincare brands of Estée Lauder in China and Japan
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing the official websites of Estée Lauder.

However, it is not possible to evaluate the product for all brands, as they do not have official websites for the region and it is not possible to view the assortment. Thus, in the skincare category in China and Japan, we were able to analyze the products of the brands highlighted in grey:
Table 8
Analyzed skincare brands of Estée Lauder in China and Japan
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing the official websites of Estée Lauder brands in China and Japan.

On the example of the first brand, we will describe how we assessed standardization/adaptation, and then we will briefly describe the results of the analysis for the other brands.

First of all, we evaluate such criteria as Brand and Positioning. In this case, no differences were found in China as compared to the US, so we assign 7 points:
Table 9

The next step is to compare the presence/absence of skincare lines (or subcategories) in the home market catalog (USA) and in the host market catalog (China). If a product line is absent in the first or the second country, it is given 1 point. If the product line is present in both cases, we then compare the number of products in the product line and the availability of products that are present in China and absent in the USA. In this way, we calculate the percentage of 'similarity' of the product lines by the number of products and multiply by 7 to determine the value on a 7-point scale. The last step is to take the average of all product lines:

Table 10
Example of measuring the degree of standardization/adaptation of ‘Items/models in product line’ for one brand
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder's official websites in China and the USA.

This is how we calculated the value for a criterion like 'Items/models in product line'. 

Next, we evaluate the ranges that are presented in both countries according to four criteria: Name, Labeling, Product design and style, Features/character. The results for Estée Lauder brand lines are presented in the table below:

Table 11
Example of measuring the degree of standardization/adaptation of 4 elements for one brand
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder's official websites in China and the USA.

And at the final stage, we collect data on the first two points that we assessed in the first step (Brand and Positioning) and the average values of all evaluation criteria for all lines. Then we calculate the average score for all criteria:
Table 12
Degree of standardization/adaptation for the Estée Lauder brand in China
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder's official websites in China and the USA.
Thus, the degree of standardization/adaptation for the Estée Lauder brand in China is 6.24 points on a 7-point scale, where 7 is complete standardization.
In Japan the result is as follows:
Table 13
Degree of standardization/adaptation for the Estée Lauder brand in Japan
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder's official websites in Japan and the USA.

In this case, the brand not only has a different number of products in its product lines compared to the US, but also contains products that are not available on the home market – ‘spring’ gift sets with packaging with a picture of Sakura, which contain lightening products. Calculations for this case were made according to the following logic: in a particular line in the U.S. catalog there are 19 products, in Japan – 14, three of which are not in the home market, so the percentage of similarity is equal: (14-3)/19 = 58%, then the score for ‘Items/models in product line’ for this line is: 7*58% = 4.05. Also, due to the fact that these products have different design and functionality, elements such as Product design and style’ and ‘Features/character’ have a degree of adaptation corresponding to the number of such products relative to the entire line.

We analyzed the rest of Estée Lauder's brands in China in the same way, and the results are presented in the table:


Table 14
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ skincare in China, by brands
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in China and the USA.


The final standardization/adaptation score for Estée Lauder's product strategy in China is 6.37 out of 7:
Table 15
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ skincare in China, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in China and the USA.

As can be seen from the table, the element ‘Items/models in product line’ has the highest degree of adaptation. For most brands, this is reflected in their limited product offerings in the Chinese market compared to the US. However, for some brands it is also the presence of products on the host market that are not available on the home market. These brands include:
• Lab Series: serum with a rejuvenating effect with black gold extract (also differs in packaging – completely black);
• Bobbi Brown: brightening serum with cordyceps, ginseng, bamboo grass extract (also different packaging – completely black); extra repair moisturizing SPF balm; two extra repair moisture creams; soothing cleansing oil set; extra lip tint duo set; a lightening product line consisting of three products;
• La Mer: rejuvenating serum with gold extract (the packaging also differs - the bottle is golden and the shape is rounder, the rest are dark green); a set of face masks with deep sea algae;
• Origins: a series of lightening products consisting of 4 products; serum with white rice extract.
As described above, many of these products differ in the effect they deliver or the ingredients they contain, as well as the packaging design. It was they who influenced the degree of adaptation in such elements as ‘Product design and style’, ‘Features/character’. No differences were found among the remaining elements among all brands.

We then analyzed Estée Lauder brands in the skincare category in Japan, the result is presented in the table:

Table 16
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ skincare in Japan, by brands

Table 16 – continues 
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.

Final score for standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder's product strategy in Japan - out of 6.32 out of 7:
Table 17
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ skincare in China, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in China and the USA.

As in the case of China, a certain degree of adaptation is present in the items ‘Items/models in product line’, ‘Product design and style’, ‘Features/character’. Listed below are the differences (besides the limited selection on the host market), products that are only present in Japan:
Estée Lauder: ‘spring’ gift sets with packaging with a picture of Sakura, containing brightening products;
Clinique: night eyelash serum; wipes for use with brightening lotion;
Lab Series: set of lotions; sunscreen SPF50 (only SPF35 available in the US);
Bobbi Brown: intensive primer serum with ginseng (also different packaging – completely black); intensive eye cream; two brightening serums; various sets: for preparation for makeup, for facial and eye skin care, for lip skin care; sets with cosmetic bags, etc.;
La Mer: three sets with trial moisturizers (small volume), three sets of creams and serums with cosmetic bags; cleansing gel, oil cleanser; two lip care kits;
Jo Malone: 6 gift sets of body creams; two body creams with new scents (the packaging design is also different – the label is silver, unlike the rest white); set of body lotions; 8 different sets with hand creams and cosmetic bags.

In the fragrance segment, Estée Lauder has 6 brands, 5 of which are present in China, 6 in Japan. However, as in the case of the skincare segment, we were not able to analyze all brands due to the lack of regional sites. The analyzed brands are highlighted in grey in the table:
Table 18
Analyzed fragrance brands of Estée Lauder in China and Japan
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing the official websites of Estée Lauder brands in China and Japan.


The result of the assessment of standardization/adaptation of products of these brands in China is presented below:



Table 19
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ fragrance in China, by brands
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in China and the USA.

As in the skincare segment, adaptation is present only for the items ‘Items/models in product line’, ‘Product design and style’, ‘Features/character’. Final score – 6.58 out of 7:
Table 20
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ fragrance in China, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in China and the USA.

Significant differences in the assortment of China:
Jo Malone: additional fragrances in the ‘Rose’ series; a series of ‘Sakura’ perfumes with oriental-style packaging;
Le Labo: Four additional woody fragrances.
The result of the assessment of standardization/adaptation of products of the analyzed brands in Japan is presented below:
Table 21
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ fragrance in Japan, by brands
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.

Final score 6.83 out of 7:

Table 22
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder’ fragrance in Japan, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.
Significant differences in the Japanese assortment:
Jo Malone: there are sets of perfumes in mini format;
Le Labo: limited product catalog (54 of 74 available in the US).

The final assessment of the degree of product standardization/adaptation for Estée Lauder in the countries and segments we analyzed is as follows:
Table 23
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder in Asia
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Estée Lauder brand's official websites in China, Japan and the USA.

We also found out when the products adapted for China and Japan were released approximately. For this purpose, we used the tool for determining the date of creation of website pages (Carbon Dating the Web, 2024). With the help of it, we found out the dates of appearance of the product pages of the cosmetics we need. We assume that these dates almost coincide with the start of sales of the products we are interested in. Thus, more than half of the products went on sale in the second and third quarters of 2023 (for example, La Mer: a lightening product line consisting of three products; Origins: a series of lightening products consisting of 4 products; Lab Series: sunscreen SPF50; Bobbi Brown: intensive primer serum with ginseng, two brightening serums). In the company's report for the fourth quarter of 2023, Coty reported sales growth in the Asia region. One of the reasons cited was “new product launches and the strategic focus on luxury Fragrance and Skin Care” (Estee Lauder Quarterly Earnings Press Release Q4 2023). Thus, it can be concluded that the launch of the above products has had a positive impact on the company's sales.

From the analysis we can draw the following conclusions:
Estée Lauder's product strategy in China and Japan is closer to full standardization;
For the skincare segment, the company used adaptation more often than for fragrance;
Product elements that have some degree of adaptation are ‘Items/models in product line’, ‘Product design and style’, ‘Features/character’. For the rest, no changes were noticed for the host market;
Most often, there is a reduction in the range of brands for China and Japan, but there are also cases when the catalogs of these countries contain products that are not on the home market;
Among such products the main ones can be identified:
- lightening series,
- sets of products (including mini-formats, gift ones),
- products with special ingredients: gold extract, white rice/ginseng, algae,
- products with extra sun protection;
Changes in design mainly come in the form of either all-black packaging or an 'oriental style' such as cherry blossoms.













2.3. International product marketing strategies of Coty in China and Japan

In this subchapter, we will analyze the international product marketing strategy of Coty in China and Japan.
Coty is the tenth largest beauty company in the world by revenue in 2022 with a market share of 1.2% (Statista, 2023c). The company was founded in Paris in 1904, but is now headquartered in New York. Coty products can now be found in more than 130 countries around the world. The company's revenue distribution by region is as follows: approximately 45% is EMEA, 43% – Americas, 12% – Asia Pacific (Coty Annual Report 2023):


Figure 4. Shares of regions in Coty’s revenue, value, 2023
Source: compiled by the authors from the data from Coty Annual Report 2023

China currently accounts for about 4% of Coty's sales, but one of the strategy goals for the coming years is to increase the company's presence in the country (Coty Annual Report 2023). 
Coty's main product segment is fragrance, where most of the company's brands and sales are concentrated. The portfolio also includes makeup and skincare products. The distribution of net revenue in 2021-2023 was as follows (Coty Annual Report 2023):
Table 24
Share of product categories in Coty's net sales
Source: Coty Annual Report 2023

Knowing the share of fragrance segment in the company's revenue, we calculated the revenue in this segment as $3.12 bln. Knowing the share of the Asian region in the company's revenue, we calculated the approximate revenue of the fragrance segment of the company in Asia – $0.37 bln. Also, with the knowledge of Asia's share in the global fragrance market (19%) (Prime Target, 2023) and global fragrance revenue ($70 bln) (MCKinsey & Company, 2023), we have calculated the revenue of the fragrance segment in Asia to be $13.3 bln. Thus, we identified the company's approximate fragrance market share in Asia – 2.8%. By the same method we calculated the company's share in the skincare market in Asia – 0.17%.

The fragrance category is represented by 24 brands, 20 of which are represented in China and Japan. We managed to analyze products of 5 brands in China and 4 in Japan (highlighted in grey in the table below), for the rest there was insufficient information in open sources:
Table 25
Analyzed fragrance brands of Coty in China and Japan
Table 25 – continues
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing the official websites of Coty brands in China and Japan.

The analysis of the degree of standardization/adaptation of the products of these brands was done in the same way as for Estée Lauder in the previous subchapter. The result for the Chinese market is as follows:
Table 26
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ fragrance in China, by brands
Table 26 – continues 

Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in China and the USA.


The final score is 6.51 out of 7, where 7 is full standardization:
Table 27
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ fragrance in China, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in China and the USA.

As can be seen from the table, three elements underwent a certain degree of adaptation: Items/models in product line, Product design and style and Features/character. The following forms of adaptation were identified:
Reduction of the model range;
Seven men's perfumes, differing in scents and, in some cases, designs from the Hugo Boss brand.

In the Japanese market, we analyzed the products of 4 company brands:


Table 28
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ fragrance in Japan, by brands
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.

The final score was 6.65 and only one element was adapted:
Table 29
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ fragrance in Japan, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.

The only form of adaptation in this market is a reduction in the range of product lines.

In the skincare segment, Coty already has significantly fewer brands – six, three of which are represented in China and Japan and were analyzed by us:

Table 30
Analyzed skincare brands of Coty in China and Japan
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing the official websites of Coty brands in China and Japan.


The Lancaster brand has the highest degree of adaptation in China:

Table 31
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ skincare in China, by brands
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in China and the USA.


The final score for skincare products in China is 6.43. Two items have some degree of adaptation:

Table 32
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ skincare in China, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in China and the USA.

The forms of adaptation were:
Reducing the number of products in the product lines;
One additional rejuvenating night cream from the Lancaster brand;
Anti-aging products in kit format, also from Lancaster.

In Japan, the result by brand was as follows:
Table 33
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ skincare in Japan, by brands
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.
Final average score – 6.07:
Table 34
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty’ skincare in Japan, by elements
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in Japan and the USA.

The forms of adaptation were as follows:
Reducing the number of products in product lines;
One additional anti-aging night cream from the Lancaster brand;
Anti-aging products in set format also from the Lancaster brand;
One additional white rose scented body lotion.

The final assessment of the degree of product standardization/adaptation for Coty in the countries and segments we analyzed is as follows:
Table 35
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty in Asia
Source: compiled by the authors on the basis of data obtained by analyzing Coty brand's official websites in China, Japan and the USA.


From the analysis we can draw the following conclusions:
Coty's product strategy in China and Japan is closer to full standardization;
For the skincare segment, the company used adaptation more often than for fragrance;
Product elements that have some degree of adaptation are ‘Items/models in product line’, ‘Product design and style’, ‘Features/character’. For the rest, no changes were noticed for the host market;
Most often, there is a reduction in the range of brands for China and Japan, but there are also cases when the catalogs of these countries contain products that are not on the home market;
Among such products the main ones can be identified:
- Additional perfume aromas with modified design;
- Night rejuvenating cream;
- Anti-aging products in set format;
- Body lotion with white rose scent.















3. Results of research and recommendations for beauty companies
3.1 Key research findings

In chapter one and chapter two, we looked for an answer to the research question "How product standardization and adaptation dilemma in international marketing strategies is solved by beauty companies in Asia?". In the first chapter, the sources of information were existing studies and in the second chapter, our own research. Now we will summarize the results and compare the answers found by the two methods with each other.
We were able to find descriptions of the international product marketing strategies of five beauty companies/brands in current research on the topic. In all cases adaptation was applied (Table 3).
 However, in none of the case studies was there a full analysis of which elements of the product were changed and which were not, nor was there a calculation of the degree of standardization/adaptation. Although in exploring broader topics in the previous subchapters 1.2, 1.3, we found a method by which modern researchers perform such an analysis. A product is divided into several elements and then each is rated on a scale of 1 to 7, where 1 is full adaptation and 7 is full standardization.
In the second chapter, we analyzed according to the method described above. We examined the international product marketing strategies of two companies in two segments – skincare (the largest in Asia) and fragrance (with the largest growth in the region) in two countries – China and Japan. 
The degrees of standardization/adaptation by country were as follows:
Table 36
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder and Coty, by countries
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 2nd Chapter.

Thus, the results differ by country: Estée Lauder used adaptation more often in China, and Coty in Japan.
However, if we compare the degrees by segment, the results are the same.  Both Estée Lauder and Coty used adaptation more often for skincare products than for fragrance:
Table 37
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder and Coty, by segments
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 2nd Chapter.

If we look at the strategies in more detail, we can see that Estée Lauder had three product elements adapted to varying degrees in both skincare and fragrance:

Table 38
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Estée Lauder, by elements and segments
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 2nd Chapter

The situation is the same for the second company:
Table 39
Degree of standardization/adaptation of Coty, by elements and segments

Table 39 – continues 
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 2nd Chapter.

As can be seen from the tables above, the set of elements that have been adapted to varying degrees in the two companies are also the same: Items/models in product line, Product design and style, Features/character. 

Thus, we can compare what kind of answer to the research question we got when we studied the current literature on this topic and when we conducted our own research:
Table 40
Comparison of answers to research question from the 1st and 2nd Chapters
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 1st and  2nd Chapters.

However, another goal of this paper is to make recommendations for the beauty companies. For this purpose, we also needed to analyze in more depth the forms of product adaptations and compare the results of the two companies in the target market.
The forms of adaptation of the two companies by segment are presented in the table:

Table 41
Forms of adaptation of Estée Lauder and Coty, by segments
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 2nd Chapter.

The table above shows that the first company's forms of adaptation are much more diverse: in addition to a reduction in the assortment, there are several types of special products for the host market. For the second company, the main form of adaptation is a reduction in the number of products in the lineup; additional products for Asian countries were released in only one form in skincare and fragrance. In total, Estée Lauder has 6 forms of adaptation in skincare and 4 in fragrance, while Coty has only 2 forms in each segment.
We also found a link between the launch of adapted products and increased sales in the region at Estée Lauder: most of these products started selling in Q2 and Q3 2023, and then the company reported a 4% increase in sales in Asia in its Q4 report. One of the reasons cited was “new product launches and the strategic focus on luxury Fragrance and Skin Care”. It can be concluded that Estée Lauder's forms of adaptation in the Asian market had a positive result, which was reflected in the growth of a specific indicator.
Another of the significant indicators of a company's performance in a particular country is the market share it occupies in that market. International marketing strategy is one of the main “contributors” in winning over consumers, and therefore affects market share to some extent. A comparison of the two companies we are considering shows that Estée Lauder's share in Asia is larger than Coty's in both segments: skincare, which is the largest for Estée Lauder, and fragrance, which is key for Coty:
Table 42
Comparison of Estée Lauder and Coty market shares by segments in Asia, value, 2023
Source: compiled by the authors based on the analysis in the 2nd Chapter.

Thus, we can conclude that Estée Lauder performs better than Coty in the Asian market, which is in one way or another supported by the international product marketing strategy of the company.







3.2 Recommendations for the international beauty companies

When entering the Asian market, beauty companies should carefully consider their product strategies. The reasons for this are the presence of specific ideas about the attractive appearance of consumers among representatives of this region and a fairly high level of development of the beauty industry in the main countries of Asia.
 
We recommend that beauty companies, when entering the Asian market, consider the possibility of partially adapting the following product elements:
Items/models in product line;
Features/character;
Design and style.

Recommendations regarding the first element: reducing the range of products should not be the only and main form of adaptation. We recommend that new complementary products for host countries should also be considered. Changes in these products should address the following two elements mentioned above.

Recommendations regarding the second element:
In the skincare segment, we recommend focusing on features such as skin tone brightening and extra sun protection effects. If there are no such products in the company's current product range, it is worth considering.
We also recommend paying attention to the composition and ingredients: for Asian countries it is worth adding natural substances that are considered classic and beneficial for the skin, such as ginseng, bamboo grass extract, white rice extract, gold extract.
Products in modified formats may also be in demand: gift sets with additional items, such as cosmetic bags; "sampler" sets with reduced volume; sets with several products for a specific purpose (e.g. lightening). This applies to both skincare and fragrance products.

Recommendations regarding the third element: we recommend considering a special series with a modified design. We noticed that several quite well-known brands used the following variants: all-black packaging, design with gold elements, an 'oriental style' with such elements as cherry blossoms. This applies to both skincare and fragrance products.

Otherwise, we recommend to base on the company's specific capabilities, general trends in the global market, activities of key market players and competitors. There is no need to radically change the assortment for Asian countries; the product marketing strategies of companies with fairly large market shares are quite close to full standardization.


















3.3 Recommendations on further research

Our study has the following limitations:
The study includes cases of only two cosmetic companies from the top-10 beauty companies in the world.
Our analysis covers the products of these companies in only two segments of the beauty market – skincare and fragrance.
We analyzed the product marketing strategies of the companies in only two Asian countries – China and Japan, although their brands are also present in other countries in the region.

We recommend the following areas for further research:
Consider the strategies of other beauty companies;
Consider the strategies of companies (both those analyzed by us and others) in two other segments of the beauty market – haircare and makeup;
Consider the strategies of companies (both those analyzed by us and others) in other Asian countries;
To extend the analysis of the degree of standardization/adaptation to other elements of the marketing complex – Price, Place, Promotion.











Conclusion

One of the main objectives of this paper is to answer the question "How product standardization and adaptation dilemma in international marketing strategies is solved by beauty companies in Asia?". To answer this question, we first reviewed existing research in this area in chapter one and then conducted our own analysis in chapter two.

Key research findings of the first chapter:
For different elements of the marketing mix, a company can use different strategies: adapt some, and standardize others. Also, even within a single element, it is more common not to find pure adaptation and standardization, but a mixture of these strategies. This is where the notion of degree of standardization/adaptation comes in;
To determine the degree of standardization/adaptation of an element, researchers divide it into its components and evaluate each on a seven-point scale, where 1 is 'very different', 7 is 'very similar'. 
Beauty companies use both standardization and adaptation across different marketing mix components.
In all cases described in the literature companies used product adaptation in Asia (6 cases out of 6). 
However, no article on this topic has analyzed which elements of the product have been adapted and which have remained unchanged. That is, these studies did not identify the degree of standardization/adaptation, and it is not possible to say what proportion of the portfolio was subject to change for another country's market.
Thus, modern research answers our research question as follows: beauty companies more often use adaptation when forming an international product marketing strategy for Asian countries.


In the second chapter we analyzed the international marketing product strategies of two beauty companies in two segments – skincare and fragrance (as the most promising for Asia) in two countries – China and Japan. We applied the method of determining the degree of product standardization/adaptation and calculated the value for Estée Lauder and Coty. 
The results of the two companies for the two countries are different: Estée Lauder was more likely to adapt for China, while Coty was more likely to adapt for Japan. However, the results by segment are the same: both companies used adaptation more often for skincare than for fragrance. 
Also, the product elements that were adapted to some extents are the same for both companies in both segments: 'Items/models in product line', 'Product design and style', 'Features/character'.
Comparing the forms of adaptation, we conclude that the first company's forms of adaptation are more diverse and include several types of products launches specifically for the host market, while the second company's main form of adaptation is the reduction of the product range.

The third chapter was devoted to the analysis of the results and the formation of recommendations for beauty companies and future research.
First of all, we compared the answers to the research question that we found when studying the articles and during our own analysis. We mentioned the first above, the second sounds like this: “Beauty companies, when forming an international marketing strategy for a product, most often use a low degree of adaptation, which primarily affect such product elements as items/models in the product line, features/character, design and style”. With the help of our analysis in the second chapter, we were able to clarify the degree of adaptation and the specific components of the product.
Further, based on the comparison of the companies' shares in the analyzed segments in Asia and the information we found about the positive impact of the release of most of Estée Lauder's adapted products on sales in the region, we concluded that the company's results in Asia are better than Coty's, which is to some extent facilitated by the international product marketing strategy. Thus, we were able to formulate recommendations for the companies, which are mainly based on the fact that adaptation should include not only the reduction of the assortment, but also the launch of specialized products. We have also made recommendations regarding each of the three product elements whose change should be considered when forming a strategy for Asia.

Thus, all the objectives of this paper have been accomplished: secondary research through the study of existing scientific articles and primary research through the analysis of case studies of two companies. Moreover, we identified a research gap in the existing literature on the topic, which we were able to close during the second task. In this way we have fulfilled the main goal of our work – to answer the research question and also on the basis of this to form recommendations for beauty companies, which can be useful for managers when creating an international marketing strategy of the product for host Asian countries.














References
Research papers and articles
Ashikari, M. (2005). Cultivating Japanese whiteness: The “whitening” cosmetics boom and the Japanese identity. Journal of Material Culture, 10(1), 73-91.
Calantone, R. J., Cavusgil, S. T., Schmidt, J. B., & Shin, G. C. (2004). Internationalization and the dynamics of product adaptation — An empirical investigation. Journal of Business Research, 59, 176–185.
Cho K. (2012). Selections from The Search for the Beautiful Woman: A Cultural History of Japanese and Chinese Beauty. Review of Japanese Culture and Society 27(1), 184-190.
Deighton, J., Kornfeld, L., He, Y., & Jiang, Q. (2010). Herborist. Harvard Business School Case.
Dennehy, D., Kasraian, L., O’Raghallaigh, P., & Conboy, K. (2016). Product market fit frameworks for lean product development. Paper presented at the Proceedings of R&D Management Conference.
Doole, I., & Lowe, R. (2008). International Marketing Strategy: Analysis, Development and Implementation. Cengage Learning EMEA.
Ghantous, N. (2008). Brand internationalization strategy beyond the standardization/adaptation dichotomy. Paper presented at the Thought Leaders International Conference on Brand Management, 15-16 April.
Gupta, S. & Randhawa, G. (2008). Retail Management. Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.
Haeruddin, W., Musa, M.I., Kurniawan, A.W. (2023). Marketing strategy analysis in a global market. Journal Management & Economics Review (JUMPER), 1(1), 17–24.
Horska´, E., Ubreziova, I., Kekäle, T. (2007). Product adaptation in processes of internationalization: Case of the Slovak food-processing companies. Baltic Journal of Management, 2 (3), 319-333.
Hultman, M., Robson, M. J., & Katsikeas, C. S. (2009). Export Product Strategy Fit and Performance: An Empirical Investigation. Journal of International Marketing, 17(4), 1–23. 
Ichijo Kazuo (2012). Doing Business in Asia. Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.
Johnson, J. (2007). Indian star’s skin cream ad causes irritation. Financial Times.
Jones, G. (2011). Globalization and Beauty: A Historical and Firm Perspective. EurAmerica, 41(4), 885-916.
Katsikeas, C. S., Samiee, S., & Theodosiou, M. (2006). Strategy Fit and Performance Consequences of International Marketing Standardization. Strategic Management Journal, 27(9), 867–890.
Komleva, K. E., Karnitskaya, A. V., Karnitskaya, L. V., & Smirnov, V. V. (2023). International marketing strategies on the market of consumer goods. Russian Economic Bulletin, 6(1), 254-257.
Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Saunders, J., & Wong, V. (2008). Principles of marketing. Pearson Education.
Kotler, P., & Keller, K. (2012). Marketing management. Prentice Hall. 
Kotliarov, I. D. (2012). Marketing mix: an attempt at critical analysis. Russian Journal of Education and Psychology, 4 (12), 4-14.
Kotulla, T., & Schmid, S. (2016). International Standardization and Adaptation of Products – Combining the Fit Approach and the Profit Logic. Marketing: ZFP – Journal of Research and Management, 38(4), 180–198. 
Lages, L. F., Jap, S. D., & Griffith, D. A. (2008). The Role of Past Performance in Export Ventures: A Short-Term Reactive Approach. Journal of International Business Studies, 39(2),304–325.
Liang, C., & Li, C. G. (2022). Research on International Marketing of Chinese Beauty Brands Based on the 4I Theory. Modern Economy, 13, 1435-1449.
Lim, L. K., Acito, F., & Rusetski, A. (2006). Development of archetypes of international marketing strategy. Journal of International Business Studies, 37(4), 499-524.
Mandler, T., Sezen, B., Chen, J. (2021). Performance consequences of marketing standardization/adaptation: A systematic literature review and future research agenda. Journal of Business Research, 125, 416-435.
Mihailovic, T., Vescovi, T., Pontiggia, A. The Beauty Ideal in Chinese Luxury Cosmetics: Adaptation Strategies of Western Companies (2017). Department of Management, Università Ca' Foscari Venezia Working Paper No. 2017/07.
Motohashi K. (2015). Global Business Strategy: Multinational Corporations Venturing into Emerging Markets. Springer Open.
Nguyen, B., Melewar, T. C., & Schultz, D. E. (2017). Asia Branding: Connecting Brands, Consumers and Companies. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Onkvisit, S.,  Shaw, J. (2004). International marketing: Analysis and strategy. Psychology Press.
Oyama, S. (2009). The Emergence of Pan-Asian Brands: Regional Strategies of Japanese Cosmetics Brands. Media International Australia, 133(1), 85-96.
Panevchik, V., Samoylov, M., Kakoshko, E. (2012). Standardization in marketing. Science and Innovation, 115, 42-44.
Perrault, W. D., Jr., & McCarthy, E.J. (1996). Basic marketing: A global managerial approach. McGraw-Hill Erwin.
Ryans, J.K.J., Griffith, D.A. and White, D.S. (2003) ‘Standardization/adaptation of international 
marketing strategy: necessary conditions for the advancement of knowledge’, International 
Ryans, J.K.J., Griffith, D.A. and White, D.S. (2003) ‘Standardization/adaptation of international 
marketing strategy: necessary conditions for the advancement of knowledge’, International
Rojanadilok, T., Bunchapattanasakda, C. (2011). Marketing Strategies of Imported Herbal Cosmetic in Thailand. Information Management and Business Review, 3, 217-221.
Ryans, J.K.J., Griffith, D.A., White, D.S. (2003). Standardization/adaptation of international marketing strategy: Necessary conditions for the advancement of knowledge. International Marketing Review, 20, 588−603. 
Schmidt, S.O., Tyler, K., Brennan, R. (2007). Аdaptation in inter-firm relationships: classification, motivation, calculation. Journal of Services Marketing, 21(7), 530-537. 
Shankar, V., Carpenter, G. (2012). Handbook of marketing strategy. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Tan, Q., Sousa, C. M. P. (2013). International marketing standardization: A meta-analytical estimation of its antecedents and consequences. Management International Review, 53(5), 711-739.
Thanisorn, R. (2013). Marketing Strategies of Herbal Cosmetic Products: Thai and Imported Products. Journal of Economics and Behavioral Studies, 5(4), 242-251.
Theodosiou, M., Leonidou, L.C. (2003). Standardization Versus Adaptation of International Marketing Strategy: An Integrative Assessment of the Empirical Research. International Business Review, 12(2), 141–171.
Zaiem, I.,  Zghidi,  A. B.  Y. (2011).  Product adaptation strategy and  export performance:  The impacts  of the  internal  firm  characteristics  and business segment. Contemporary Management Research, 7(4), 291-311.

Statistical sources and reports
Attest (2022). Beauty and cosmetics market size: growth and industry trends. Attest Official Website. Retrieved March 15, from  Beauty & Cosmetics Market Size: Growth and Industry Trends| Attest Blog (askattest.com)
Coty Annual Report (2023). Coty Official Website. Retrieved March 20, from https://investors.coty.com/financial-information/annual-reports-and-s4-filings/default.aspx 
Estée Lauder Annual Report (2023). Estée Lauder Official Website. Retrieved March 18, from https://www.elcompanies.com/en/investors/earnings-and-financials/annual-reports 
Estée Lauder Quarterly Earnings Press Release Q4 (2023). Estée Lauder Official Website. Retrieved March 18, from https://www.elcompanies.com/en/investors/earnings-and-financials/quarterly-earnings/2023 
InkWood Research (2023). Gloval Beauty & Personal Care Forecast 2023-2032. InkWood Research Official Website. Retrieved March 15, from Global Beauty & Personal Care Market, Size | Trends by 2032 (inkwoodresearch.com)
MaxiMize MarketResearch (2023). Household Product Market: Global Industry Analysis and Forecast (2024-2030). MaxiMize MarketResearch Official Website. Retrieved March 5, from Household Product Market: Global Industry Analysis and (maximizemarketresearch.com)
MCKinsey&Company (2023).The beauty market in 2023: A special State of Fashion report. MCKinsey&Company Official Website. Retrieved February 25, from https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our-insights/the-beauty-market-in-2023-a-special-state-of-fashion-report 
Prime Target (2023). Fragrances and perfumes market – the future is scented. Global market outlook. Prime Target Official Website. Retrieved March 5, from https://primetarget.tech/fragrances-and-perfumes-market-the-future-is-scented/#:~:text=Major%20markets%20globally%3A%20by%20region,on%20a%20per%20capita%20basis. 
ResearchAndMarkets (2023). Global Cycling Apparel Market by Demographics (Female, Kids, Male), Product (Accessories, Bottom Wear, Gloves), Distribution - Forecast 2023-2030. ResearchAndMarkets Official Website. Retrieved March 5, from Global Cycling Apparel Market by Demographics (Female, Kids, Male), Product (Accessories, Bottom Wear, Gloves), Distribution - Forecast 2023-2030 (researchandmarkets.com)
Statista (2023). Fragrances – Worlwide. Statista Official Website. Retrieved March 5, from https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/beauty-personal-care/fragrances/worldwide 
Statista (2023a). Cosmetics – Worlwide. Statista Official Website. Retrieved March 6, from https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/beauty-personal-care/cosmetics/worldwide 
Statista (2023b). Hair Care – Worldwide. Statista Official Website. Retrieved March 6, from https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/beauty-personal-care/personal-care/hair-care/worldwide 
Statista (2023c). Revenue of the leading 10 beauty manufacturers worldwide in 2022. Statista Official Website. Retrieved February 21, from Largest cosmetic companies in the world 2022 | Statista
Statista (2023d). Distribution of skin care products market worldwide in 2018 and 2023, by region. Statista Official Website. Retrieved March 17, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/815498/global-market-share-skin-care-by-region/ 

Electronic Sources
Aerin Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 13, from  https://www.aerin.com/ 
Aerin Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 13, from  https://www.esteelauder.com.cn/products/9196/product-catalog/aerin 
Aerin Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 13, from  https://www.elcompanies.com/ja-jp/our-brands/aerin-beauty 
Bobbi Brown Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 11, from  https://www.bobbibrowncosmetics.com/ 
Bobbi Brown Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 11, from  https://www.bobbibrown.com.cn/ 
Bobbi Brown Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 11, from  https://www.bobbibrown.jp/ 
Burberry Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 9, from  https://row.burberry.com/ 
Burberry Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 9, from  https://www.burberry.cn/ 
Burberry Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 9, from  https://jp.burberry.com/ 
Carbon Dating the Web (2024). Retrieved April 15, from  https://carbondate.cs.odu.edu/ 
Chloe Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 18, from  https://www.chloe.com/ 
Chloe Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 18, from  https://www.chloe.com/cn 
Chloe Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 18, from https://www.chloe.com/jp 
Clinique Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 1, from https://www.clinique.com/ 
Clinique Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 1, from https://www.clinique.com.cn/ 
Clinique Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 1, from https://www.clinique.jp/ 
Coty Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 5, from  https://www.coty.com/ 
Estée Lauder Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 2, from https://www.elcompanies.com/en 
Estée Lauder Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 2, from https://www.esteelauder.com.cn/ 
Estée Lauder Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 2, from https://www.esteelauder.jp/ 
Gucci Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 7, from  https://www.gucci.com/ 
Gucci Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 7, from https://www.gucci.cn/zh/ 
Gucci Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 7, from https://www.gucci.com/jp/ja/ 
Hugo Boss Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 23, from https://www.hugoboss.com/ 
Jo Malone Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 25, from https://www.jomalone.com/ 
Jo Malone Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 25, from https://www.jomalone.com.cn/ 
Jo Malone Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 25, from https://www.jomalone.jp/ 
Kilian Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 23, from https://www.bykilian.com/ 
Kylie Skin Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 19, from https://kyliecosmetics.com/collections/kylie-skin 
Lab Series Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 14, from https://www.labseries.com/ 
Lab Series Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 14, from https://www.labseries.com.cn/  
Lab Series Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 14, from https://www.labseries.jp/  
La Mer Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 20, from https://www.cremedelamer.com/ 
La Mer Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 20, from https://www.lamer.com.cn/ 
La Mer Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 20, from https://www.delamer.jp/ 
Lancaster Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 27, from https://www.lancaster-beauty.com/en 
Le Labo Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 27, from https://www.lelabofragrances.com/ 
Origins Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 12, from https://www.origins.com/ 
Origins Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 12, from https://www.origins.com.cn/ 
Paixao Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 28, from https://www.linhapaixao.com.br/ 
Philosophy Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 27, from https://philosophy.com/ 
Tiffany Official Website (2024). Retrieved March 30, from https://www.tiffany.com/ 
Tiffany Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved March 30, from https://www.tiffany.cn/ 
Tiffany Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved March 30, from https://www.tiffany.co.jp/ 
Tom Ford Beauty Official Website (2024). Retrieved April 2, from https://www.tomfordbeauty.com/ 
Tom Ford Official Website, China (2024). Retrieved April 2, from https://www.tomford.hk/ 
Tom Ford Official Website, Japan (2024). Retrieved April 2, from https://www.tomford.jp/ 

